David Hume, Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
[1777]

Part I: Essays Moral, Political, and Literary
Essay I: Of the Delicacy of Taste and Passion
Essay II: Of the Liberty of the Press
Essay III: That Politics May Be Reduced to a Science
Essay IV: Of the First Principles of Government
Essay V: Of the Origin of Government
Essay VI: Of the Independency of Parliament
Essay VII: Whether the British Government Inclines More to Absolute
Monarchy, Or to a Republic
Essay VIII: Of Parties In General
Essay IX: Of the Parties of Great Britain
Essay X: Of Superstition and Enthusiasm
Essay XI: Of the Dignity Or Meanness of Human Nature
Essay XII: Of Civil Liberty
Essay XIII: Of Eloquence
Essay XIV: Of the Rise and Progress of the Arts and Sciences
Essay XV: The Epicurean
Essay XVI: The Stoic
Essay XVII: The Platonist
Essay XVIII: The Sceptic
Essay XIX: Of Polygamy and Divorces
Essay XX: Of Simplicity and Refinement In Writing
Essay XXI: Of National Characters
Essay XXII: Of Tragedy
Essay XXIII: Of the Standard of Taste
Part II: Essays Moral, Political, and Literary
Essay I: Of Commerce
Essay II: Of Refinement In the Arts
Essay III: Of Money
Essay IV: Of Interest
Essay V: Of the Balance of Trade
Essay VI: Of the Jealousy of Trade
Essay VII: Of the Balance of Power
Essay VIII: Of Taxes
Essay IX: Of Public Credit
Essay X: Of Some Remarkable Customs
Essay XI: Of the Populousness of Ancient Nations
Essay XII: Of the Original Contract
Essay XIII: Of Passive Obedience
Essay XIV: Of the Coalition of Parties
Essay XV: Of the Protestant Succession
Essay XVI: Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth
Essays Withdrawn and Unpublished
Essay I: Of Essay-writing
Essay II: Of Moral Prejudices
Essay III: Of the Middle Station of Life
Essay IV: Of Impudence and Modesty
Essay V: Of Love and Marriage
Essay VI: Of the Study of History
Essay VII: Of Avarice
Essay VIII: A Character of Sir Robert Walpole
Essay IX: Of Suicide
Essay X: Of the Immortality of the Soul
Variant Readings
Variant Readings to Part I
Variant Readings to Part Ii
Variant Readings to Essays Withdrawn and Unpublished
Glossary

Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 6 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704

THE LIFE OF DAVID HUME, ESQ.
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF
MY OWN LIFE1
It is difficult for a man to speak long of himself without vanity; therefore, I shall be
short. It may be thought an instance of vanity that I pretend at all to write my life; but
this Narrative shall contain little more than the History of my Writings; as, indeed,
almost all my life has been spent in literary pursuits and occupations. The first success
of most of my writings was not such as to be an object of vanity.
I was born the 26th of April 1711, old style, at Edinburgh. I was of a good family,
both by father and mother: my father’s family is a branch of the Earl of Home’s, or
Hume’s; and my ancestors had been proprietors of the estate, which my brother
possesses, for several generations. My mother was daughter of Sir David Falconer,
President of the College of Justice: the title of Lord Halkerton came by succession to
her brother.
My family, however, was not rich, and being myself a younger brother, my
patrimony, according to the mode of my country, was of course very slender. My
father, who passed for a man of parts, died when I was an infant, leaving me, with an
elder brother and a sister, under the care of our mother, a woman of singular merit,
who, though young and handsome, devoted herself entirely to the rearing and
educating of her children. I passed through the ordinary course of education with
success, and was seized very early with a passion for literature, which has been the
ruling passion of my life, and the great source of my enjoyments. My studious
disposition, my sobriety, and my industry, gave my family a notion that the law was a
proper profession for me; but I found an unsurmountable aversion to every thing but
the pursuits of philosophy and general learning; and while they fancied I was poring
upon Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the authors which I was secretly
devouring.
My very slender fortune, however, being unsuitable to this plan of life, and my health
being a little broken by my ardent application, I was tempted, or rather forced, to
make a very feeble trial for entering into a more active scene of life. In 1734, I went to
Bristol, with some recommendations to eminent merchants, but in a few months found
that scene totally unsuitable to me. I went over to France, with a view of prosecuting
my studies in a country retreat; and I there laid that plan of life, which I have steadily
and successfully pursued. I resolved to make a very rigid frugality supply my
deficiency of fortune, to maintain unimpaired my independency, and to regard every
object as contemptible, except the improvement of my talents in literature.
During my retreat in France, first at Reims, but chiefly at La Fleche, in Anjou, I
composed my Treatise of Human Nature. After passing three years very agreeably in
that country, I came over to London in 1737. In the end of 1738, I published my
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 16 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Treatise, and immediately went down to my mother and my brother, who lived at his
country-house, and was employing himself very judiciously and successfully in the
improvement of his fortune.
Never literary attempt was more unfortunate than my Treatise of Human Nature. It
fell dead-born from the press, without reaching such distinction, as even to excite a
murmur among the zealots. But being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper, I
very soon recovered the blow, and prosecuted with great ardour my studies in the
country. In 1742, I printed at Edinburgh the first part of my Essays: the work was
favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former disappointment. I
continued with my mother and brother in the country, and in that time recovered the
knowledge of the Greek language, which I had too much neglected in my early youth.
In 1745, I received a letter from the Marquis of Annandale, inviting me to come and
live with him in England; I found also, that the friends and family of that young
nobleman were desirous of putting him under my care and direction, for the state of
his mind and health required it.—I lived with him a twelvemonth. My appointments
during that time made a considerable accession to my small fortune. I then received
an invitation from General St. Clair to attend him as a secretary2 to his expedition,
which was at first meant against Canada, but ended in an incursion on the coast of
France. Next year, to wit, 1747, I received an invitation from the General to attend
him in the same station in his military embassy to the courts of Vienna and Turin. I
then wore3 the uniform of an officer, and was introduced at these courts as aid-decamp
to the general, along with Sir Harry Erskine and Captain Grant, now General
Grant. These two years were almost the only interruptions which my studies have
received during the course4 of my life: I passed them agreeably, and in good
company; and my appointments, with my frugality, had made me reach a fortune,
which I called independent, though most of my friends were inclined to smile when I
said so; in short, I was now master of near a thousand pounds.5
I had always entertained a notion, that my want of success in publishing the Treatise
of Human Nature, had proceeded more from the manner than the matter, and that I
had been guilty of a very usual indiscretion, in going to the press too early. I,
therefore, cast the first part of that work anew in the Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding, which was published while I was at Turin. But this piece was at first
little6 more successful than the Treatise of Human Nature. On my return from Italy, I
had the mortification to find all England in a ferment, on account of Dr. Middleton’s
Free Enquiry, while my performance was entirely overlooked and neglected. A new
edition, which had been published at London of my Essays, moral and political, met
not with a much better reception.
Such is the force of natural temper, that these disappointments made little or no
impression on me. I went down in 1749, and lived two years with my brother at his
country-house, for my mother was now dead. I there composed the second part of my
Essays, which I called Political Discourses, and also my Enquiry concerning the
Principles of Morals, which is another part of my treatise that I cast anew. Meanwhile,
my bookseller, A. Millar, informed me, that my former publications (all but the
unfortunate Treatise) were beginning to be the subject of conversation; that the sale of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 17 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
them was gradually increasing, and that new editions were demanded. Answers by
Reverends, and Right Reverends, came out two or three in a year; and I found, by Dr.
Warburton’s railing, that the books were beginning to be esteemed in good company.
However, I had fixed a resolution, which I inflexibly maintained, never to reply to any
body; and not being very irascible in my temper, I have easily kept myself clear of all
literary squabbles. These symptoms of a rising reputation gave me encouragement, as
I was ever more disposed to see the favourable than unfavourable side of things; a
turn of mind which it is more happy to possess, than to be born to an estate of ten
thousand a year.
In 1751, I removed from the country to the town, the true scene for a man of letters. In
1752, were published at Edinburgh, where I then lived, my Political Discourses, the
only work of mine that was successful on the first publication. It was well received
abroad and at home. In the same year was published at London, my Enquiry
concerning the Principles of Morals; which, in my own opinion (who ought not to
judge on that subject), is of all my writings, historical, philosophical, or literary,
incomparably the best. It came unnoticed and unobserved into the world.
In 1752, the Faculty of Advocates chose me their Librarian, an office from which I
received little or no emolument, but which gave me the command of a large library. I
then formed the plan of writing the History of England; but being frightened with the
notion of continuing a narrative through a period of 1700 years, I commenced with
the accession of the House of Stuart, an epoch when, I thought, the misrepresentations
of faction began chiefly to take place. I was, I own, sanguine in my expectations of
the success of this work. I thought that I was the only historian, that had at once
neglected present power, interest, and authority, and the cry of popular prejudices;
and as the subject was suited to every capacity, I expected proportional applause. But
miserable was my disappointment: I was assailed by one cry of reproach,
disapprobation, and even detestation; English, Scotch, and Irish, Whig and Tory,
churchman and sectary, freethinker and religionist, patriot and courtier, united in their
rage against the man, who had presumed to shed a generous tear for the fate of
Charles I. and the Earl of Strafford; and after the first ebullitions of their fury7 were
over, what was still more mortifying, the book seemed to sink into oblivion. Mr.
Millar told me, that in a twelvemonth he sold only forty-five copies of it. I scarcely,
indeed, heard of one man in the three kingdoms, considerable for rank or letters, that
could endure the book. I must only except the primate of England, Dr. Herring, and
the primate of Ireland, Dr. Stone, which seem two odd exceptions. These dignified
prelates separately sent me messages not to be discouraged.
I was, however, I confess, discouraged; and had not the war been at that time breaking
out between France and England, I had certainly retired to some provincial town of
the former kingdom, have changed my name, and never more have returned to my
native country. But as this scheme was not now practicable, and the subsequent
volume was considerably advanced, I resolved to pick up courage and to persevere.
In this interval, I published at London my Natural History of Religion, along with
some other small pieces: its public entry was rather obscure, except only that Dr. Hurd
wrote a pamphlet against it, with all the illiberal petulance, arrogance, and scurrility,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 18 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
which distinguish8 the Warburtonian school. This pamphlet gave me some
consolation for the otherwise indifferent reception of my performance.
In 1756, two years after the fall of the first volume, was published the second volume
of my History, containing the period from the death of Charles I. till the Revolution.
This performance happened to give less displeasure to the Whigs, and was better
received. It not only rose itself, but helped to buoy up its unfortunate brother.
But though I had been taught by experience, that the Whig party were in possession of
bestowing all places, both in the state and in literature, I was so little inclined to yield
to their senseless clamour, that in above a hundred alterations, which farther study,
reading, or reflection engaged me to make in the reigns of the two first Stuarts, I have
made all of them invariably to the Tory side. It is ridiculous to consider the English
constitution before that period as a regular plan of liberty.
In 1759, I published my History of the House of Tudor. The clamour against this
performance was almost equal to that against the History of the two first Stuarts. The
reign of Elizabeth was particularly obnoxious. But I was now callous against the
impressions of public folly, and continued very peaceably and contentedly in my
retreat at Edinburgh, to finish, in two volumes, the more early part of the English
History, which I gave to the public in 1761, with tolerable, and but tolerable success.
But, notwithstanding this variety of winds and seasons, to which my writings had
been exposed, they had still been making such advances, that the copy-money given
me by the booksellers, much exceeded any thing formerly known in England; I was
become not only independent, but opulent. I retired to my native country of Scotland,
determined never more to set my foot out of it; and retaining the satisfaction of never
having preferred a request to one great man, or even making advances of friendship to
any of them. As I was now turned of fifty, I thought of passing all the rest of my life
in this philosophical manner, when I received, in 1763, an invitation from the Earl of
Hertford,9 with whom I was not in the least acquainted, to attend him on his embassy
to Paris, with a near prospect of being appointed secretary to the embassy; and, in the
meanwhile, of performing the functions of that office. This offer, however inviting, I
at first declined, both because I was reluctant to begin connexions with the great, and
because I was afraid that the civilities and gay company of Paris, would prove
disagreeable to a person of my age and humour: but on his lordship’s repeating the
invitation, I accepted of it. I have every reason, both of pleasure and interest, to think
myself happy in my connexions with that nobleman, as well as afterwards with his
brother, General Conway.
Those who have not seen the strange effects10 of modes, will never imagine the
reception I met with at Paris, from men and women of all ranks and stations. The
more I resiled11 from their excessive civilities, the more I was loaded with them.
There is, however, a real satisfaction in living at Paris, from the great number of
sensible, knowing, and polite company with which that city12 abounds above all
places in the universe. I thought once of settling there for life.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 19 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
I was appointed secretary to the embassy; and, in summer 1765, Lord Hertford left
me, being appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. I was chargé d’affaires till the arrival
of the Duke of Richmond, towards the end of the year. In the beginning of 1766, I left
Paris, and next summer went to Edinburgh, with the same view as formerly, of
burying myself in a philosophical retreat. I returned to that place, not richer, but with
much more money, and a much larger income, by means of Lord Hertford’s
friendship, than I left it; and I was desirous of trying what superfluity could produce,
as I had formerly made an experiment of a competency. But, in 1767, I received from
Mr. Conway an invitation to be Under-secretary; and this invitation, both the
character of the person, and my connexions with Lord Hertford, prevented me from
declining. I returned to Edinburgh in 1769, very opulent (for I possessed a revenue of
1000 l.13 a year), healthy, and though somewhat stricken in years, with the prospect
of enjoying long my ease, and of seeing the increase of my reputation.
In spring 1775, I was struck with a disorder in my bowels, which at first gave me no
alarm, but has since, as I apprehend it, become mortal and incurable. I now reckon
upon a speedy dissolution. I have suffered very little pain from my disorder; and what
is more strange, have, notwithstanding the great decline of my person, never suffered
a moment’s abatement of my spirits; insomuch, that were I to name the period of my
life, which I should most choose to pass over again, I might be tempted to point to this
later period. I possess the same ardour as ever in study, and the same gaiety in
company. I consider, besides, that a man of sixty-five, by dying, cuts off only a few
years of infirmities; and though I see many symptoms of my literary reputation’s
breaking out at last with additional lustre, I knew that I could have14 but few years to
enjoy it. It is difficult to be more detached from life than I am at present.
To conclude historically with my own character. I am, or rather was (for that is the
style I must now use in speaking of myself, which emboldens me the more to speak
my sentiments); I was, I say, a man of mild dispositions, of command of temper, of an
open, social, and cheerful humour, capable of attachment, but little susceptible of
enmity, and of great moderation in all my passions. Even my love of literary fame, my
ruling passion, never soured my temper,15 notwithstanding my frequent
disappointments. My company was not unacceptable to the young and careless, as
well as to the studious and literary; and as I took a particular pleasure in the company
of modest women, I had no reason to be displeased with the reception I met with from
them. In a word, though most men any wise eminent, have found reason to complain
of calumny, I never was touched, or even attacked by her baleful tooth: and though I
wantonly exposed myself to the rage of both civil and religious factions, they seemed
to be disarmed in my behalf of their wonted fury. My friends never had occasion to
vindicate any one circumstance of my character and conduct: not but that the zealots,
we may well suppose, would have been glad to invent and propagate any story to my
disadvantage, but they could never find any which they thought would wear the face
of probability. I cannot say there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself,
but I hope it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is easily cleared
and ascertained.
April 18, 1776.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 20 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER FROM ADAM SMITH, LL.D. TO WILLIAM
STRAHAN, ESQ.
Kirkaldy, Fifeshire, Nov. 9, 1776.
DEAR SIR,
It is with a real, though a very melancholy pleasure, that I sit down to give you some
account of the behaviour of our late excellent friend, Mr. Hume, during his last
illness.
Though, in his own judgment, his disease was mortal and incurable, yet he allowed
himself to be prevailed upon, by the entreaty of his friends, to try what might be the
effects of a long journey. A few days before he set out, he wrote that account of his
own life, which, together with his other papers, he has left to your care. My account,
therefore, shall begin where his ends.
He set out for London towards the end of April, and at Morpeth met with Mr. John
Home and myself, who had both come down from London on purpose to see him,
expecting to have found him at Edinburgh. Mr. Home returned with him, and attended
him during the whole of his stay in England, with that care and attention which might
be expected from a temper so perfectly friendly and affectionate. As I had written to
my mother that she might expect me in Scotland, I was under the necessity of
continuing my journey. His disease seemed to yield to exercise and change of air, and
when he arrived in London, he was apparently in much better health than when he left
Edinburgh. He was advised to go to Bath to drink the waters, which appeared for
some time to have so good an effect upon him, that even he himself began to
entertain, what he was not apt to do, a better opinion of his own health. His
symptoms, however, soon returned with their usual violence, and from that moment
he gave up all thoughts of recovery, but submitted with the utmost cheerfulness, and
the most perfect complacency and resignation. Upon his return to Edinburgh, though
he found himself much weaker, yet his cheerfulness never abated, and he continued to
divert himself, as usual, with correcting his own works for a new edition, with reading
books of amusement, with the conversation of his friends; and, sometimes in the
evening, with a party at his favourite game of whist. His cheerfulness was so great,
and his conversation and amusements run so much in their usual strain, that,
notwithstanding all bad symptoms, many people could not believe he was dying. “I
shall tell your friend, Colonel Edmondstone,” said Doctor Dundas to him one day,
“that I left you much better, and in a fair way of recovery.” “Doctor,” said he, “as I
believe you would not chuse to tell any thing but the truth, you had better tell him,
that I am dying as fast as my enemies, if I have any, could wish, and as easily and
cheerfully as my best friends could desire.” Colonel Edmondstone soon afterwards
came to see him, and take leave of him; and on his way home, he could not forbear
writing him a letter bidding him once more an eternal adieu, and applying to him, as
to a dying man, the beautiful French verses in which the Abbé Chaulieu, in
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 21 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
expectation of his own death, laments his approaching separation from his friend, the
Marquis de la Fare. Mr. Hume’s magnanimity and firmness were such, that his most
affectionate friends knew, that they hazarded nothing in talking or writing to him as to
a dying man, and that so far from being hurt by this frankness, he was rather pleased
and flattered by it. I happened to come into his room while he was reading this letter,
which he had just received, and which he immediately showed me. I told him, that
though I was sensible how very much he was weakened, and that appearances were in
many respects very bad, yet his cheerfulness was still so great, the spirit of life
seemed still to be so very strong in him, that I could not help entertaining some faint
hopes. He answered, “Your hopes are groundless. An habitual diarrhoea of more than
a year’s standing, would be a very bad disease at any age: at my age it is a mortal one.
When I lie down in the evening, I feel myself weaker than when I rose in the morning;
and when I rise in the morning, weaker than when I lay down in the evening. I am
sensible, besides, that some of my vital parts are affected, so that I must soon die.”
“Well,” said I, “if it must be so, you have at least the satisfaction of leaving all your
friends, your brother’s family in particular, in great prosperity.” He said that he felt
that satisfaction so sensibly, that when he was reading a few days before, Lucian’s
Dialogues of the Dead, among all the excuses which are alleged to Charon for not
entering readily into his boat, he could not find one that fitted him; he had no house to
finish, he had no daughter to provide for, he had no enemies upon whom he wished to
revenge himself. “I could not well imagine,” said he, “what excuse I could make to
Charon in order to obtain a little delay. I have done every thing of consequence which
I ever meant to do, and I could at no time expect to leave my relations and friends in a
better situation than that in which I am now likely to leave them; I, therefore, have all
reason to die contented.” He then diverted himself with inventing several jocular
excuses, which he supposed he might make to Charon, and with imagining the very
surly answers which it might suit the character of Charon to return to them. “Upon
further consideration,” said he, “I thought I might say to him, Good Charon, I have
been correcting my works for a new edition. Allow me a little time, that I may see
how the Public receives the alterations.” But Charon would answer, “When you have
seen the effect of these, you will be for making other alterations. There will be no end
of such excuses; so, honest friend, please step into the boat.” But I might still urge,
“Have a little patience, good Charon, I have been endeavouring to open the eyes of
the Public. If I live a few years longer, I may have the satisfaction of seeing the
downfal of some of the prevailing systems of superstition.” But Charon would then
lose all temper and decency. “You loitering rogue, that will not happen these many
hundred years. Do you fancy I will grant you a lease for so long a term? Get into the
boat this instant, you lazy loitering rogue.”
But, though Mr. Hume always talked of his approaching dissolution with great
cheerfulness, he never affected to make any parade of his magnanimity. He never
mentioned the subject but when the conversation naturally led to it, and never dwelt
longer upon it than the course of the conversation happened to require: it was a
subject indeed which occurred pretty frequently, in consequence of the inquiries
which his friends, who came to see him, naturally made concerning the state of his
health. The conversation which I mentioned above, and which passed on Thursday the
8th of August, was the last, except one, that I ever had with him. He had now become
so very weak, that the company of his most intimate friends fatigued him; for his
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 22 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
cheerfulness was still so great, his complaisance and social disposition were still so
entire, that when any friend was with him, he could not help talking more, and with
greater exertion, than suited the weakness of his body. At his own desire, therefore, I
agreed to leave Edinburgh, where I was staying partly upon his account, and returned
to my mother’s house here, at Kirkaldy, upon condition that he would send for me
whenever he wished to see me; the physician who saw him most frequently, Doctor
Black, undertaking, in the mean time, to write me occasionally an account of the state
of his health.
On the 22d of August, the Doctor wrote me the following letter:
“Since my last, Mr. Hume has passed his time pretty easily, but is much weaker. He
sits up, goes down stairs once a day, and amuses himself with reading, but seldom
sees any body. He finds that even the conversation of his most intimate friends
fatigues and oppresses him; and it is happy that he does not need it, for he is quite free
from anxiety, impatience, or low spirits, and passes his time very well with the
assistance of amusing books.”
I received the day after a letter from Mr. Hume himself, of which the following is an
extract.
Edinburgh, 23d August, 1776.
“my dearest friend, I am obliged to make use of my nephew’s hand in writing to you,
as I do not rise to-day. . . .
“I go very fast to decline, and last night had a small fever, which I hoped might put a
quicker period to this tedious illness, but unluckily it has, in a great measure, gone off.
I cannot submit to your coming over here on my account, as it is possible for me to
see you so small a part of the day, but Doctor Black can better inform you concerning
the degree of strength which may from time to time remain with me. Adieu, &c.”
Three days after I received the following letter from Doctor Black.
Edinburgh, Monday, 26th August, 1776.
“dear sir, Yesterday about four o’clock afternoon, Mr. Hume expired. The near
approach of his death became evident in the night between Thursday and Friday,
when his disease became excessive, and soon weakened him so much, that he could
no longer rise out of his bed. He continued to the last perfectly sensible, and free from
much pain or feelings of distress. He never dropped the smallest expression of
impatience; but when he had occasion to speak to the people about him, always did it
with affection and tenderness. I thought it improper to write to bring you over,
especially as I heard that he had dictated a letter to you desiring you not to come.
When he became very weak, it cost him an effort to speak, and he died in such a
happy composure of mind, that nothing could exceed it.”
Thus died our most excellent, and never to be forgotten friend; concerning whose
philosophical opinions men will, no doubt, judge variously, every one approving, or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 23 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
condemning them, according as they happen to coincide or disagree with his own; but
concerning whose character and conduct there can scarce be a difference of opinion.
His temper, indeed, seemed to be more happily balanced, if I may be allowed such an
expression, than that perhaps of any other man I have ever known. Even in the lowest
state of his fortune, his great and necessary frugality never hindered him from
exercising, upon proper occasions, acts both of charity and generosity. It was a
frugality founded, not upon avarice, but upon the love of independency. The extreme
gentleness of his nature never weakened either the firmness of his mind, or the
steadiness of his resolutions. His constant pleasantry was the genuine effusion of
good-nature and good-humour, tempered with delicacy and modesty, and without
even the slightest tincture of malignity, so frequently the disagreeable source of what
is called wit in other men. It never was the meaning of his raillery to mortify; and
therefore, far from offending, it seldom failed to please and delight, even those who
were the objects of it. To his friends, who were frequently the objects of it, there was
not perhaps any one of all his great and amiable qualities, which contributed more to
endear his conversation. And that gaiety of temper, so agreeable in society, but which
is so often accompanied with frivolous and superficial qualities, was in him certainly
attended with the most severe application, the most extensive learning, the greatest
depth of thought, and a capacity in every respect the most comprehensive. Upon the
whole, I have always considered him, both in his lifetime and since his death, as
approaching as nearly to the idea of a perfectly wise and virtuous man, as perhaps the
nature of human frailty will permit.
I Ever Am, Dear Sir,
Most Affectionately Your’S,
Adam Smith.
ESSAYS
AND
TREATISES
ON
SEVERAL SUBJECTS.
In TWO VOLUMES.
By DAVID HUME, Esq.
VOL. I.
CONTAINING
ESSAYS, MORAL, POLITICAL, and LITERARY.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 24 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
A NEW EDITION.
LONDON:
Printed for T. Cadell, in the Strand : and A. Donaldson, and W. Creech, at Edinburgh.
MDCCLXXVII.
ESSAYS,
MORAL, POLITICAL,
AND
LITERARY.
PART I.*
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 25 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
PART I*
ESSAYS MORAL, POLITICAL, AND LITERARY
ESSAY I
OF THE DELICACY OF TASTE AND PASSION*
Some People are subject to a certain delicacy of passion,1 which makes them
extremely sensible to all the accidents of life, and gives them a lively joy upon every
prosperous event, as well as a piercing grief, when they meet with misfortunes and
adversity. Favours and good offices° easily engage their friendship; while the smallest
injury provokes their resentment. Any honour or mark of distinction elevates them
above measure; but they are as sensibly touched with contempt.° People of this
character have, no doubt, more lively enjoyments, as well as more pungent° sorrows,
than men of cool and sedate tempers: But, I believe, when every thing is balanced,
there is no one, who would not rather be of the latter character, were he entirely
master of his own disposition. Good or ill fortune is very little at our disposal: And
when a person, that has this sensibility° of temper, meets with any misfortune, his
sorrow or resentment takes entire possession of him, and deprives him of all relish in
the common occurrences of life; the right enjoyment of which forms the chief part of
our happiness. Great pleasures are much less frequent than great pains; so that a
sensible temper must meet with fewer trials in the former way than in the latter. Not
to mention, that men of such lively passions are apt to be transported beyond all
bounds of prudence and discretion, and to take false steps in the conduct of life, which
are often irretrievable.
There is a delicacy of taste observable in some men, which very much resembles this
delicacy of passion, and produces the same sensibility to beauty and deformity of
every kind, as that does to prosperity and adversity, obligations and injuries. When
you present a poem or a picture to a man possessed of this talent, the delicacy of his
feeling makes him be sensibly touched with every part of it; nor are the masterly
strokes perceived with more exquisite relish and satisfaction, than the negligences or
absurdities with disgust and uneasiness. A polite and judicious conversation affords
him the highest entertainment; rudeness or impertinence is as great a punishment to
him. In short, delicacy of taste has the same effect as delicacy of passion: It enlarges
the sphere both of our happiness and misery, and makes us sensible to pains as well as
pleasures, which escape the rest of mankind.
I believe, however, every one will agree with me, that, notwithstanding this
resemblance, delicacy of taste is as much to be desired and cultivated as delicacy of
passion is to be lamented, and to be remedied, if possible. The good or ill accidents of
life are very little at our disposal; but we are pretty much masters what books we shall
read, what diversions we shall partake of, and what company we shall keep.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 26 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Philosophers have endeavoured to render happiness entirely independent of every
thing external. That degree of perfection is impossible to be attained: But every wise
man will endeavour to place his happiness on such objects chiefly as depend upon
himself: and that is not to be attained so much by any other means as by this delicacy
of sentiment.2 When a man is possessed of that talent, he is more happy by what
pleases his taste, than by what gratifies his appetites, and receives more enjoyment
from a poem or a piece of reasoning than the most expensive luxury can afford.a
Whatever connection there may be originally3 between these two species of delicacy,
I am persuaded, that nothing is so proper to cure us of this delicacy of passion, as the
cultivating of that higher and more refined taste, which enables us to judge of the
characters of men, of compositions of genius, and of the productions of the nobler
arts.° A greater or less relish for those obvious beauties, which strike the senses,
depends entirely upon the greater or less sensibility of the temper: But with regard to
the sciences and liberal arts, a fine taste is, in some measure, the same with strong
sense, or at least depends so much upon it, that they are inseparable. In order to judge
aright of a composition of genius, there are so many views to be taken in, so many
circumstances to be compared, and such a knowledge of human nature requisite, that
no man, who is not possessed of the soundest judgment, will ever make a tolerable
critic in such performances. And this is a new reason for cultivating a relish° in the
liberal arts. Our judgment will strengthen by this exercise: We shall form juster
notions of life: Many things, which please or afflict others, will appear to us too
frivolous to engage our attention: And we shall lose by degrees that sensibility and
delicacy of passion, which is so incommodious.°
But perhaps I have gone too far in saying, that a cultivated taste for the polite arts
extinguishes the passions, and renders us indifferent to those objects, which are so
fondly pursued by the rest of mankind. On farther reflection, I find, that it rather
improves our sensibility for all the tender and agreeable passions; at the same time
that it renders the mind incapable of the rougher and more boisterous emotions.
Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes,
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.4
For this, I think there may be assigned two very natural reasons. In the first place,
nothing is so improving to the temper as the study of the beauties, either of poetry,
eloquence, music, or painting. They give a certain elegance of sentiment to which the
rest of mankind are strangers. The emotions which they excite are soft and tender.
They draw off the mind from the hurry of business and interest; cherish reflection;
dispose to tranquillity; and produce an agreeable melancholy,° which, of all
dispositions of the mind, is the best suited to love and friendship.
In the second place, a delicacy of taste is favourable to love and friendship, by
confining our choice to few people, and making us indifferent to the company and
conversation of the greater part of men. You will seldom find, that mere men of the
world, whatever strong sense they may be endowed with, are very nice° in
distinguishing characters, or in marking those insensible differences and gradations,
which make one man preferable to another. Any one, that has competent sense, is
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 27 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
sufficient for their entertainment: They talk to him, of their pleasure and affairs, with
the same frankness that they would to another; and finding many, who are fit to
supply his place, they never feel any vacancy° or want° in his absence. But to make
use of the allusion of a celebrated French5 author, the judgment6 may be compared to
a clock or watch, where the most ordinary machine is sufficient to tell the hours; but
the most elaborate alone can point out the minutes and seconds, and distinguish the
smallest differences of time. One that has well digested his knowledge both of books
and men, has little enjoyment but in the company of a few select companions. He
feels too sensibly,° how much all the rest of mankind fall short of the notions which
he has entertained. And, his affections being thus confined within a narrow circle, no
wonder he carries them further, than if they were more general and undistinguished.
The gaiety and frolic of a bottle companion° improves with him into a solid
friendship: And the ardours of a youthful appetite become an elegant passion.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 28 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY II
OF THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS
Nothing is more apt to surprise a foreigner, than the extreme liberty, which we enjoy
in this country, of communicating whatever we please to the public, and of openly
censuring every measure, entered into by the king or his ministers. If the
administration resolve upon war, it is affirmed, that, either wilfully or ignorantly, they
mistake the interests of the nation, and that peace, in the present situation of affairs, is
infinitely preferable. If the passion of the ministers lie towards peace, our political
writers breathe nothing but war and devastation, and represent the pacific conduct of
the government as mean° and pusillanimous.° As this liberty is not indulged in any
other government, either republican or monarchical;1 in Holland and Venice, more
than in France or Spain; it may very naturally give occasion to a question, How it
happens thatGreat Britainalone enjoys this peculiar privilege?a
The reason, why the laws indulge us in such a liberty seems to be derived from our
mixed form of government, which is neither wholly monarchical, nor wholly
republican. It will be found, if I mistake not, a true observation in politics, that the two
extremes in government, liberty and slavery, commonly approach nearest to each
other; and that, as you depart from the extremes, and mix a little of monarchy with
liberty, the government becomes always the more free; and on the other hand, when
you mix a little of liberty with monarchy, the yoke becomes always the more grievous
and intolerable.b In a government, such as that of France, which is absolute, and
where law, custom, and religion concur, all of them, to make the people fully satisfied
with their condition, the monarch cannot entertain any jealousy° against his subjects,
and therefore is apt to indulge them in great liberties both of speech and action. In a
government altogether republican, such as that of Holland, where there is no
magistrate so eminent as to give jealousy to the state, there is no danger in intrusting
the magistrates with large discretionary powers; and though many advantages result
from such powers, in preserving peace and order, yet they lay a considerable restraint
on men’s actions, and make every private citizen pay a great respect to the
government. Thus it seems evident, that the two extremes of absolute monarchy and
of a republic, approach near to each other in some material circumstances. In the first,
the magistrate has no jealousy of the people: in the second, the people have none of
the magistrate: Which want° of jealousy begets a mutual confidence and trust in both
cases, and produces a species of liberty in monarchies, and of arbitrary power in
republics.
To justify the other part of the foregoing observation, that, in every government, the
means are most wide of each other, and that the mixtures of monarchy and liberty
render the yoke either more easy or more grievous; I must take notice of a remark in
Tacitus with regard to the Romans under the emperors, that they neither could bear
total slavery nor total liberty, Nec totam servitutem, nec totam libertatem pati
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 29 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
possunt.2 This remark a celebrated poet has translated and applied to the English, in
his lively description of queen Elizabeth’s policy and government,
Et fit aimer son joug a l’Anglois indompté,
Qui ne peut ni servir, ni vivre en liberté,
Henriade, liv. I.3
According to these remarks, we are to consider the Roman government under the
emperors as a mixture of despotism and liberty, where the despotism prevailed; and
the English government as a mixture of the same kind, where the liberty
predominates. The consequences are conformable to the foregoing observation; and
such as may be expected from those mixed forms of government, which beget a
mutual watchfulness and jealousy. The Roman emperors were, many of them, the
most frightful tyrants that ever disgraced human nature; and it is evident, that their
cruelty was chiefly excited by their jealousy, and by their observing that all the great
men of Rome bore with impatience the dominion of a family, which, but a little
before, was no wise superior to their own. On the other hand, as the republican part of
the government prevails in England, though with a great mixture of monarchy, it is
obliged, for its own preservation, to maintain a watchful jealousy over the
magistrates, to remove all discretionary powers, and to secure every one’s life and
fortune by general and inflexible laws. No action must be deemed a crime but what
the law has plainly determined to be such: No crime must be imputed to a man but
from a legal proof before his judges; and even these judges must be his fellowsubjects,
who are obliged, by their own interest, to have a watchful eye over the
encroachments and violence of the ministers. From these causes it proceeds, that there
is as much liberty, and even, perhaps, licentiousness° in Great Britain, as there were
formerly slavery and tyranny in Rome.
These principles account for the great liberty of the press in these kingdoms, beyond
what is indulged in any other government.c It is apprehended, that arbitrary power
would steal in upon us, were we not careful to prevent its progress, and were there not
an easy method of conveying the alarm from one end of the kingdom to the other. The
spirit of the people must frequently be rouzed,° in order to curb the ambition of the
court; and the dread of rouzing this spirit must be employed to prevent that ambition.
Nothing so effectual to this purpose as the liberty of the press, by which all the
learning, wit, and genius of the nation may be employed on the side of freedom, and
every one be animated° to its defence. As long, therefore, as the republican part of our
government can maintain itself against the monarchical, it will naturally be careful to
keep the press open, as of importance to its own preservation.
It must however be allowed, that the unbounded liberty of the press, though it be
difficult, perhaps impossible, to propose a suitable remedy for it, is one of the evils,
attending those mixt forms of government.d
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 30 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY III
THAT POLITICS MAY BE REDUCED TO A SCIENCE
It is a question with several, whether there be any essential difference between one
form of government and another? and, whether every form may not become good or
bad, according as it is well or ill administered?1 Were it once admitted, that all
governments are alike, and that the only difference consists in the character and
conduct of the governors, most political disputes would be at an end, and all Zeal for
one constitution above another, must be esteemed mere bigotry and folly. But, though
a friend to moderation, I cannot forbear condemning this sentiment, and should be
sorry to think, that human affairs admit of no greater stability, than what they receive
from the casual humours and characters of particular men.
It is true; those who maintain, that the goodness of all government consists in the
goodness of the administration, may cite many particular instances in history, where
the very same government, in different hands, has varied suddenly into the two
opposite extremes of good and bad. Compare the French government under Henry
III.2 and under Henry IV.3 Oppression, levity,°artifice° on the part of the rulers;
faction,° sedition, treachery, rebellion, disloyalty on the part of the subjects: These
compose the character of the former miserable æra. But when the patriot and heroic
prince, who succeeded, was once firmly seated on the throne, the government, the
people, every thing seemed to be totally changed; and all from the difference of the
temper and conduct of these two sovereigns.a Instances of this kind may be
multiplied, almost without number, from ancient as well as modern history, foreign as
well as domestic.
But here it may be proper to make a distinction. All absolute governmentsb must very
much depend on the administration; and this is one of the great inconveniences
attending that form of government. But a republican and free government would be an
obvious absurdity, if the particular checks and controuls, provided by the constitution,
had really no influence, and made it not the interest, even of bad men, to act for the
public good. Such is the intention of these forms of government, and such is their real
effect, where they are wisely constituted: As on the other hand, they are the source of
all disorder, and of the blackest crimes, where either skill or honesty has been wanting
in their original frame and institution.
So great is the force of laws, and of particular forms of government, and so little
dependence have they on the humours° and tempers of men, that consequences almost
as general and certain may sometimes be deduced from them, as any which the
mathematical sciences afford us.
The constitution of the Roman republic gave the whole legislative power to the
people, without allowing a negative voice either to the nobility or consuls. This
unbounded power they possessed in a collective, not in a representative body. The
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 31 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
consequences were: When the people, by success and conquest, had become very
numerous, and had spread themselves to a great distance from the capital, the citytribes,
though the most contemptible, carried almost every vote: They were, therefore,
most cajoled by every one that affected popularity:° They were supported in idleness
by the general distribution of corn, and by particular bribes, which they received from
almost every candidate: By this means, they became every day more licentious,° and
the Campus Martius4 was a perpetual scene of tumult and sedition: Armed slaves
were introduced among these rascally citizens; so that the whole government fell into
anarchy, and the greatest happiness, which the Romans could look for, was the
despotic power of the Cæsars. Such are the effects of democracy without a
representative.
A Nobility may possess the whole, or any part of the legislative power of a state, in
two different ways. Either every nobleman shares the power as part of the whole
body, or the whole body enjoys the power as composed of parts, which have each a
distinct power and authority. The Venetian aristocracy is an instance of the first kind
of government: The Polish of the second. In the Venetian government the whole body
of nobility possesses the whole power, and no nobleman has any authority which he
receives not from the whole. In the Polish government every nobleman, by means of
his fiefs,° has a distinct hereditary authority over his vassals, and the whole body has
no authority but what it receives from the concurrence of its parts. The different
operations and tendencies of these two species of government might be made apparent
even a priori.5 A Venetian nobility is preferable to a Polish, let the humours and
education of men be ever so much varied. A nobility, who possess their power in
common, will preserve peace and order, both among themselves, and their subjects;
and no member can have authority enough to controul the laws for a moment. The
nobles will preserve their authority over the people, but without any grievous tyranny,
or any breach of private property; because such a tyrannical government promotes not
the interests of the whole body, however it may that of some individuals. There will
be a distinction of rank between the nobility and people, but this will be the only
distinction in the state. The whole nobility will form one body, and the whole people
another, without any of those private feuds and animosities, which spread ruin and
desolation every where. It is easy to see the disadvantages of a Polish nobility in every
one of these particulars.
It is possible so to constitute a free government, as that a single person, call him
doge,° prince, or king, shall possess a large share of power, and shall form a proper
balance or counterpoise to the other parts of the legislature. This chief magistrate may
be either elective or hereditary; and though the former institution may, to a superficial
view, appear the most advantageous; yet a more accurate inspection will discover in it
greater inconveniencies than in the latter, and such as are founded on causes and
principles eternal and immutable. The filling of the throne, in such a government, is a
point of too great and too general interest, not to divide the whole people into
factions:° Whence a civil war, the greatest of ills, may be apprehended, almost with
certainty, upon every vacancy. The prince elected must be either a Foreigner or a
Native: The former will be ignorant of the people whom he is to govern; suspicious of
his new subjects, and suspected by them; giving his confidence entirely to strangers,
who will have no other care but of enriching themselves in the quickest manner, while
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 32 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
their master’s favour and authority are able to support them. A native will carry into
the throne all his private animosities and friendships, and will never be viewed in his
elevation,° without exciting the sentiment of envy in those, who formerly considered
him as their equal. Not to mention that a crown is too high a reward ever to be given
to merit alone, and will always induce the candidates to employ force, or money, or
intrigue, to procure the votes of the electors: So that such an election will give no
better chance for superior merit in the prince, than if the state had trusted to birth
alone for determining their sovereign.
It may therefore be pronounced as an universal axiom in politics, That an hereditary
prince, a nobility without vassals, and a people voting by their representatives, form
the bestmonarchy, aristocracy, anddemocracy. But in order to prove more fully, that
politics admit of general truths, which are invariable by the humour or education
either of subject or sovereign, it may not be amiss to observe some other principles of
this science, which may seem to deserve that character.
It may easily be observed, that, though free governments have been commonly the
most happy for those who partake of their freedom; yet are they the most ruinous and
oppressive to their provinces: And this observation may, I believe, be fixed as a
maxim of the kind we are here speaking of. When a monarch extends his dominions
by conquest, he soon learns to consider his old and his new subjects as on the same
footing; because, in reality, all his subjects are to him the same, except the few friends
and favourites, with whom he is personally acquainted. He does not, therefore, make
any distinction between them in his general laws; and, at the same time, is careful to
prevent all particular acts of oppression on the one as well as on the other. But a free
state necessarily makes a great distinction, and must always do so, till men learn to
love their neighbours as well as themselves. The conquerors, in such a government,
are all legislators, and will be sure to contrive matters, by restrictions on trade, and by
taxes, so as to draw some private, as well as public, advantage from their conquests.
Provincial governors have also a better chance, in a republic, to escape with their
plunder, by means of bribery or intrigue; and their fellow-citizens, who find their own
state to be enriched by the spoils of the subject provinces, will be the more inclined to
tolerate such abuses. Not to mention, that it is a necessary precaution in a free state to
change the governors frequently; which obliges these temporary tyrants to be more
expeditious and rapacious, that they may accumulate sufficient wealth before they
give place to their successors. What cruel tyrants were the Romans over the world
during the time of their commonwealth! It is true, they had laws to prevent oppression
in their provincial magistrates; but Cicero informs us, that the Romans could not
better consult the interests of the provinces than by repealing these very laws. For, in
that case, says he, our magistrates, having entire impunity, would plunder no more
than would satisfy their own rapaciousness; whereas, at present, they must also satisfy
that of their judges, and of all the great men in Rome, of whose protection they stand
in need.6 Who can read of the cruelties and oppressions of Verres without horror and
astonishment? And who is not touched with indignation to hear, that, after Cicero had
exhausted on that abandoned criminal all the thunders of his eloquence, and had
prevailed so far as to get him condemned to the utmost extent of the laws; yet that
cruel tyrant lived peaceably to old age, in opulence and ease, and, thirty years
afterwards, was put into the proscription° by Mark Anthony, on account of his
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 33 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
exorbitant wealth, where he fell with Cicero himself, and all the most virtuous men of
Rome?7 After the dissolution of the commonwealth, the Roman yoke became easier
upon the provinces, as Tacitus informs us;8 and it may be observed, that many of the
worst emperors, Domitian,9 for instance, were careful to prevent all oppression on the
provinces. In10Tiberius’s time, Gaul was esteemed richer than Italy itself: Nor, do I
find, during the whole time of the Roman monarchy, that the empire became less rich
or populous in any of its provinces; though indeed its valour and military discipline
were always upon the decline. The oppression and tyranny of the Carthaginians over
their subject states in Africa went so far, as we learn from Polybius,11 that, not
content with exacting the half of all the produce of the land, which of itself was a very
high rent, they also loaded them with many other taxes.d If we pass from ancient to
modern times, we shall still find the observation to hold. The provinces of absolute
monarchies are always better treated than those of free states. Compare the Païs
conquis° of France with Ireland, and you will be convinced of this truth; though this
latter kingdom, being, in a good measure, peopled from England, possesses so many
rights and privileges as should naturally make it challenge better treatment than that
of a conquered province. Corsica is also an obvious instance to the same purpose.12
There is an observation in Machiavel, with regard to the conquests of Alexander the
Great, which I think, may be regarded as one of those eternal political truths, which
no time nor accidents can vary. It may seem strange, says that politician, that such
sudden conquests, as those of Alexander, should be possessed so peaceably by his
successors, and that the Persians, during all the confusions and civil wars among the
Greeks, never made the smallest effort towards the recovery of their former
independent government.13 To satisfy us concerning the cause of this remarkable
event, we may consider, that a monarch may govern his subjects in two different
ways. He may either follow the maxims of the eastern princes, and stretch his
authority so far as to leave no distinction of rank among his subjects, but what
proceeds immediately from himself; no advantages of birth; no hereditary honours
and possessions; and, in a word, no credit among the people, except from his
commission alone. Or a monarch may exert his power after a milder manner, like
other European princes; and leave other sources of honour, beside his smile and
favour: Birth, titles, possessions, valour, integrity, knowledge, or great and fortunate
atchievements. In the former species of government, after a conquest, it is impossible
ever to shake off the yoke; since no one possesses, among the people, so much
personal credit and authority as to begin such an enterprize: Whereas, in the latter, the
least misfortune, or discord among the victors, will encourage the vanquished to take
arms, who have leaders ready to prompt and conduct them in every undertaking.14
Such is the reasoning of Machiavel, which seems solid and conclusive; though I wish
he had not mixed falsehood with truth, in asserting, that monarchies, governed
according to eastern policy, though more easily kept when once subdued, yet are the
most difficult to subdue; since they cannot contain any powerful subject, whose
discontent and faction may facilitate the enterprizes of an enemy. For besides, that
such a tyrannical government enervates the courage of men, and renders them
indifferent towards the fortunes of their sovereign; besides this, I say, we find by
experience, that even the temporary and delegated authority of the generals and
magistrates; being always, in such governments, as absolute within its sphere, as that
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 34 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
of the prince himself; is able, with barbarians, accustomed to a blind submission, to
produce the most dangerous and fatal revolutions. So that, in every respect, a gentle
government is preferable, and gives the greatest security to the sovereign as well as to
the subject.
Legislators, therefore, ought not to trust the future government of a state entirely to
chance, but ought to provide a system of laws to regulate the administration of public
affairs to the latest posterity. Effects will always correspond to causes; and wise
regulations in any commonwealth are the most valuable legacy that can be left to
future ages. In the smallest court or office, the stated forms and methods, by which
business must be conducted, are found to be a considerable check on the natural
depravity of mankind. Why should not the case be the same in public affairs? Can we
ascribe the stability and wisdom of the Venetian government, through so many ages,
to any thing but the form of government? And is it not easy to point out those defects
in the original constitution, which produced the tumultuous governments of Athens
and Rome, and ended at last in the ruin of these two famous republics? And so little
dependance has this affair on the humours and education of particular men, that one
part of the same republic may be wisely conducted, and another weakly, by the very
same men, merely on account of the difference of the forms and institutions, by which
these parts are regulated. Historians inform us that this was actually the case with
Genoa. For while the state was always full of sedition, and tumult, and disorder, the
bank of St. George, which had become a considerable part of the people, was
conducted, for several ages, with the utmost integrity and wisdom.15
The ages of greatest public spirit are not always most eminent for private virtue. Good
laws may beget order and moderation in the government, where the manners and
customs have instilled little humanity or justice into the tempers of men. The most
illustrious period of the Roman history, considered in a political view, is that between
the beginning of the first and end of the last Punic war; the due balance between the
nobility and the people being then fixed by the contests of the tribunes, and not being
yet lost by the extent of conquests. Yet at this very time, the horrid practice of
poisoning was so common, that, during part of a season, a Prætor punished capitally
for this crime above three thousand16 persons in a part of Italy; and found
informations of this nature still multiplying upon him. There is a similar, or rather a
worse instance,17 in the more early times of the commonwealth. So depraved in
private life were that people, whom in their histories we so much admire. I doubt not
but they were really more virtuous during the time of the two Triumvirates; when they
were tearing their common country to pieces, and spreading slaughter and desolation
over the face of the earth, merely for the choice of tyrants.18,
f
Here, then, is a sufficient inducement to maintain, with the utmost Zeal, in every free
state, those forms and institutions, by which liberty is secured, the public good
consulted, and the avarice or ambition of particular men restrained and punished.
Nothing does more honour to human nature, than to see it susceptible of so noble a
passion; as nothing can be a greater indication of meanness° of heart in any man, than
to see him destitute of it. A man who loves only himself, without regard to friendship
and desert,° merits the severest blame; and a man, who is only susceptible of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 35 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
friendship, without public spirit, or a regard to the community, is deficient in the most
material part of virtue.
But this is a subject which needs not be longer insisted on at present. There are enow°
of zealots on both sides who kindle up the passions of their partizans, and under
pretence of public good, pursue the interests and ends of their particular faction. For
my part, I shall always be more fond of promoting moderation than zeal; though
perhaps the surest way of producing moderation in every party is to increase our zeal
for the public. Let us therefore try, if it be possible, from the foregoing doctrine, to
draw a lesson of moderation with regard to the parties, into which our country is at
presentg divided; at the same time, that we allow not this moderation to abate the
industry and passion, with which every individual is bound to pursue the good of his
country.19
Those who either attack or defend a minister in such a government as ours,20 where
the utmost liberty is allowed, always carry matters to an extreme, and exaggerate his
merit or demerit with regard to the public. His enemies are sure to charge him with
the greatest enormities, both in domestic and foreign management; and there is no
meanness or crime, of which, in their account, he is not capable. Unnecessary wars,
scandalous treaties, profusion of public treasure, oppressive taxes, every kind of maladministration
is ascribed to him. To aggravate the charge, his pernicious conduct, it
is said, will extend its baleful influence even to posterity, by undermining the best
constitution in the world, and disordering that wise system of laws, institutions, and
customs, by which our ancestors, during so many centuries, have been so happily
governed. He is not only a wicked minister in himself, but has removed every security
provided against wicked ministers for the future.
On the other hand, the partizans of the minister make his panegyric° run as high as the
accusation against him, and celebrate his wise, steady, and moderate conduct in every
part of his administration. The honour and interest of the nation supported abroad,
public credit maintained at home, persecution restrained, faction subdued; the merit of
all these blessings is ascribed solely to the minister. At the same time, he crowns all
his other merits by a religious° care of the best constitution in the world, which he has
preserved in all its parts, and has transmitted entire, to be the happiness and security
of the latest posterity.
When this accusation and panegyric are received by the partizans of each party, no
wonder they beget an extraordinary ferment on both sides, and fill the nation with
violent animosities. But I would fain° persuade these party-zealots, that there is a flat
contradiction both in the accusation and panegyric, and that it were impossible for
either of them to run so high, were it not for this contradiction. If our constitution be
really that noble fabric, the pride ofBritain, the envy of our neighbours, raised by the
labour of so many centuries, repaired at the expence of so many millions, and
cemented by such a profusion of blood;21 I say, if our constitution does in any degree
deserve these eulogies,h it would never have suffered a wicked and weak minister to
govern triumphantly for a course of twenty years, when opposed by the greatest
geniuses in the nation, who exercised the utmost liberty of tongue and pen, in
parliament, and in their frequent appeals to the people. But, if the minister be wicked
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 36 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and weak, to the degree so strenuously insisted on, the constitution must be faulty in
its original principles, and he cannot consistently be charged with undermining the
best form of government in the world. A constitution is only so far good, as it
provides a remedy against mal-administration; and if the British, when in its greatest
vigour, and repaired by two such remarkable events, as the Revolution and Accession,
by which our ancient royal family was sacrificed to it;22 if our constitution, I say,
with so great advantages, does not, in fact, provide any such remedy, we are rather
beholden to any minister who undermines it, and affords us an opportunity of erecting
a better in its place.
I would employ the same topics to moderate the zeal of those who defend the
minister. Is our constitution so excellent? Then a change of ministry can be no such
dreadful event; since it is essential to such a constitution, in every ministry, both to
preserve itself from violation, and to prevent all enormities in the administration. Is
our constitution very bad? Then so extraordinary a jealousy and apprehension, on
account of changes, is ill placed; and a man should no more be anxious in this case,
than a husband, who had married a woman from the stews,° should be watchful to
prevent her infidelity. Public affairs, in such a government, must necessarily go to
confusion, by whatever hands they are conducted; and the zeal of patriots is in that
case much less requisite than the patience and submission of philosophers. The virtue
and good intentions of Cato and Brutus are highly laudable; but, to what purpose did
their zeal serve?23 Only to hasten the fatal period of the Roman government, and
render its convulsions and dying agonies more violent and painful.
I would not be understood to mean, that public affairs deserve no care and attention at
all. Would men be moderate and consistent, their claims might be admitted; at least
might be examined. The country-party might still assert, that our constitution, though
excellent, will admit of mal-administration to a certain degree; and therefore, if the
minister be bad, it is proper to oppose him with a suitable degree of zeal. And, on the
other hand, the court-party may be allowed, upon the supposition that the minister
were good, to defend, and with some zeal too, his administration. I would only
persuade men not to contend, as if they were fighting pro aris & focis,° and change a
good constitution into a bad one, by the violence of their factions.i
I have not here considered any thing that is personal in the present controversy. In the
best civil constitution, where every man is restrained by the most rigid laws, it is easy
to discover either the good or bad intentions of a minister, and to judge, whether his
personal character deserve love or hatred. But such questions are of little importance
to the public, and lay those, who employ their pens upon them, under a just suspicion
either of malevolence or of flattery.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 37 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY IV
OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT
Nothing appears more surprizing to those, who consider human affairs with a
philosophical eye, than the easiness with which the many are governed by the few;
and the implicit submission, with which men resign their own sentiments and passions
to those of their rulers. When we enquire by what means this wonder is effected, we
shall find, that, as Force is always on the side of the governed, the governors have
nothing to support them but opinion. It is therefore, on opinion only that government
is founded; and this maxim extends to the most despotic and most military
governments, as well as to the most free and most popular. The soldan° of Egypt, or
the emperor of Rome, might drive his harmless subjects, like brute beasts, against
their sentiments and inclination: But he must, at least, have led his mamalukes,° or
prætorian bands,° like men, by their opinion.
Opinion is of two kinds, to wit, opinion of interest, and opinion of right. By opinion
of interest, I chiefly understand the sense of the general advantage which is reaped
from government; together with the persuasion, that the particular government, which
is established, is equally advantageous with any other that could easily be settled.
When this opinion prevails among the generality of a state, or among those who have
the force in their hands, it gives great security to any government.
Right is of two kinds, right to Power and right to Property. What prevalence opinion
of the first kind has over mankind, may easily be understood, by observing the
attachment which all nations have to their ancient government, and even to those
names, which have had the sanction of antiquity. Antiquity always begets the opinion
of right; and whatever disadvantageous sentiments we may entertain of mankind, they
are always found to be prodigal° both of blood and treasure in the maintenance of
public justice.a There is, indeed, no particular, in which, at first sight, there may
appear a greater contradiction in the frame of the human mind than the present. When
men act in a faction, they are apt, without shame or remorse, to neglect all the ties of
honour and morality, in order to serve their party; and yet, when a faction is formed
upon a point of right or principle, there is no occasion, where men discover a greater
obstinacy, and a more determined sense of justice and equity. The same social
disposition of mankind is the cause of these contradictory appearances.
It is sufficiently understood, that the opinion of right to property is of moment in all
matters of government. A noted author has made property the foundation of all
government;1 and most of our political writers seem inclined to follow him in that
particular. This is carrying the matter too far; but still it must be owned, that the
opinion of right to property has a great influence in this subject.
Upon these three opinions, therefore, of public interest, of right to power, and of right
to property, are all governments founded, and all authority of the few over the many.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 38 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
There are indeed other principles, which add force to these, and determine, limit, or
alter their operation; such as self-interest,fear, and affection: But still we may assert,
that these other principles can have no influence alone, but suppose the antecedent
influence of those opinions above-mentioned. They are, therefore, to be esteemed the
secondary, not the original principles of government.
For, first, as to self-interest, by which I mean the expectation of particular rewards,
distinct from the general protection which we receive from government, it is evident
that the magistrate’s authority must be antecedently established, at least be hoped for,
in order to produce this expectation. The prospect of reward may augment his
authority with regard to some particular persons; but can never give birth to it, with
regard to the public. Men naturally look for the greatest favours from their friends and
acquaintance; and therefore, the hopes of any considerable number of the state would
never center in any particular set of men, if these men had no other title to magistracy,
and had no separate influence over the opinions of mankind. The same observation
may be extended to the other two principles of fear and affection. No man would have
any reason to fear the fury of a tyrant, if he had no authority over any but from fear;
since, as a single man, his bodily force can reach but a small way, and all the farther
power he possesses must be founded either on our own opinion, or on the presumed
opinion of others. And though affection to wisdom and virtue in a sovereign extends
very far, and has great influence; yet he must antecedently be supposed invested with
a public character, otherwise the public esteem will serve him in no stead,° nor will
his virtue have any influence beyond a narrow sphere.
A Government may endure for several ages, though the balance of power, and the
balance of property do not coincide. This chiefly happens, where any rank or order of
the state has acquired a large share in the property; but from the original constitution
of the government, has no share in the power. Under what pretence would any
individual of that order assume authority in public affairs? As men are commonly
much attached to their ancient government, it is not to be expected, that the public
would ever favour such usurpations. But where the original constitution allows any
share of power, though small, to an order of men, who possess a large share of the
property, it is easy for them gradually to stretch their authority, and bring the balance
of power to coincide with that of property. This has been the case with the house of
commons in England.
Most writers, that have treated of the British government, have supposed, that, as the
lower house represents all the commons of Great Britain, its weight in the scale is
proportioned to the property and power of all whom it represents. But this principle
must not be received as absolutely true. For though the people are apt to attach
themselves more to the house of commons, than to any other member of the
constitution; that house being chosen by them as their representatives, and as the
public guardians of their liberty; yet are there instances where the house, even when
in opposition to the crown, has not been followed by the people; as we may
particularly observe of the tory house of commons in the reign of king William.2
Were the members obliged to receive instructions from their constituents, like the
Dutch deputies, this would entirely alter the case; and if such immense power and
riches, as those of all the commons of Great Britain, were brought into the scale, it is
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 39 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
not easy to conceive, that the crown could either influence that multitude of people, or
withstand that overbalance of property. It is true, the crown has great influence over
the collective body in the elections of members; but were this influence, which at
present is only exerted once in seven years, to be employed in bringing over the
people to every vote, it would soon be wasted; and no skill, popularity, or revenue,
could support it. I must, therefore, be of opinion, that an alteration in this particular
would introduce a total alteration in our government, and would soon reduce it to a
pure republic; and, perhaps, to a republic of no inconvenient form. For though the
people, collected in a body like the Roman tribes, be quite unfit for government, yet
when dispersed in small bodies, they are more susceptible both of reason and order;
the force of popular currents and tides is, in a great measure, broken; and the public
interest may be pursued with some method and constancy. But it is needless to reason
any farther concerning a form of government, which is never likely to have place in
Great Britain, and which seems not to be the aim of any party amongst us. Let us
cherish and improve our ancient government as much as possible, without
encouraging a passion for such dangerous novelties.b
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 40 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY V
OF THE ORIGIN OF GOVERNMENT
Man, born in a family, is compelled to maintain society, from necessity, from natural
inclination, and from habit. The same creature, in his farther progress, is engaged to
establish political society, in order to administer justice; without which there can be
no peace among them, nor safety, nor mutual intercourse. We are, therefore, to look
upon all the vast apparatus of our government, as having ultimately no other object or
purpose but the distribution of justice, or, in other words, the support of the twelve
judges. Kings and parliaments, fleets and armies, officers of the court and revenue,
ambassadors, ministers, and privy-counsellors, are all subordinate in their end to this
part of administration. Even the clergy, as their duty leads them to inculcate morality,
may justly be thought, so far as regards this world, to have no other useful object of
their institution.
All men are sensible of the necessity of justice to maintain peace and order; and all
men are sensible of the necessity of peace and order for the maintenance of society.
Yet, notwithstanding this strong and obvious necessity, such is the frailty or
perverseness of our nature! it is impossible to keep men, faithfully and unerringly, in
the paths of justice. Some extraordinary circumstances may happen, in which a man
finds his interests to be more promoted by fraud or rapine, than hurt by the breach
which his injustice makes in the social union. But much more frequently, he is
seduced from his great and important, but distant interests, by the allurement of
present, though often very frivolous temptations. This great weakness is incurable in
human nature.
Men must, therefore, endeavour to palliate° what they cannot cure. They must
institute some persons, under the appellation° of magistrates, whose peculiar° office it
is, to point out the decrees of equity, to punish transgressors, to correct fraud and
violence, and to oblige men, however reluctant, to consult their own real and
permanent interests. In a word, Obedience is a new duty which must be invented to
support that of Justice; and the tyes° of equity must be corroborated by those of
allegiance.
But still, viewing matters in an abstract light, it may be thought, that nothing is gained
by this alliance, and that the factitious° duty of obedience, from its very nature, lays
as feeble a hold of the human mind, as the primitive and natural duty of justice.
Peculiar interests and present temptations may overcome the one as well as the other.
They are equally exposed to the same inconvenience. And the man, who is inclined to
be a bad neighbour, must be led by the same motives, well or ill understood, to be a
bad citizen and subject. Not to mention, that the magistrate himself may often be
negligent, or partial, or unjust in his administration.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 41 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Experience, however, proves, that there is a great difference between the cases. Order
in society, we find, is much better maintained by means of government; and our duty
to the magistrate is more strictly guarded by the principles of human nature, than our
duty to our fellow-citizens. The love of dominion is so strong in the breast of man,
that many, not only submit to, but court all the dangers, and fatigues, and cares of
government; and men, once raised to that station, though often led astray by private
passions, find, in ordinary cases, a visible interest in the impartial administration of
justice. The persons, who first attain this distinction by the consent, tacit or express, of
the people, must be endowed with superior personal qualities of valour, force,
integrity, or prudence, which command respect and confidence: and after government
is established, a regard to birth, rank, and station has a mighty influence over men,
and enforces the decrees of the magistrate. The prince or leader exclaims° against
every disorder, which disturbs his society. He summons all his partizans and all men
of probity° to aid him in correcting and redressing it: and he is readily followed by all
indifferent persons in the execution of his office. He soon acquires the power of
rewarding these services; and in the progress of society, he establishes subordinate
ministers and often a military force, who find an immediate and a visible interest, in
supporting his authority. Habit soon consolidates what other principles of human
nature had imperfectly founded; and men, once accustomed to obedience, never think
of departing from that path, in which they and their ancestors have constantly trod,
and to which they are confined by so many urgent and visible motives.
But though this progress of human affairs may appear certain and inevitable, and
though the support which allegiance brings to justice, be founded on obvious
principles of human nature, it cannot be expected that men should beforehand be able
to discover them, or foresee their operation. Government commences more casually
and more imperfectly. It is probable, that the first ascendant° of one man over
multitudes begun during a state of war; where the superiority of courage and of genius
discovers itself most visibly, where unanimity and concert are most requisite, and
where the pernicious effects of disorder are most sensibly felt. The long continuance
of that state, an incident common among savage tribes, enured the people to
submission; and if the chieftain possessed as much equity as prudence and valour, he
became, even during peace, the arbiter of all differences, and could gradually, by a
mixture of force and consent, establish his authority. The benefit sensibly felt from his
influence, made it be cherished by the people, at least by the peaceable and well
disposed among them; and if his son enjoyed the same good qualities, government
advanced the sooner to maturity and perfection; but was still in a feeble state, till the
farther progress of improvement procured the magistrate a revenue, and enabled him
to bestow rewards on the several instruments of his administration, and to inflict
punishments on the refractory° and disobedient. Before that period, each exertion of
his influence must have been particular, and founded on the peculiar circumstances of
the case. After it, submission was no longer a matter of choice in the bulk of the
community, but was rigorously exacted by the authority of the supreme magistrate.
In all governments, there is a perpetual intestine° struggle, open or secret, between
Authority and Liberty; and neither of them can ever absolutely prevail in the contest.
A great sacrifice of liberty must necessarily be made in every government; yet even
the authority, which confines liberty, can never, and perhaps ought never, in any
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 42 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
constitution, to become quite entire and uncontroulable. The sultan is master of the
life and fortune of any individual; but will not be permitted to impose new taxes on
his subjects: a French monarch can impose taxes at pleasure; but would find it
dangerous to attempt the lives and fortunes of individuals. Religion also, in most
countries, is commonly found to be a very intractable principle; and other principles
or prejudices frequently resist all the authority of the civil magistrate; whose power,
being founded on opinion, can never subvert other opinions, equally rooted with that
of his title to dominion. The government, which, in common appellation, receives the
appellation of free, is that which admits of a partition of power among several
members, whose united authority is no less, or is commonly greater than that of any
monarch; but who, in the usual course of administration, must act by general and
equal laws, that are previously known to all the members and to all their subjects. In
this sense, it must be owned,° that liberty is the perfection of civil society; but still
authority must be acknowledged essential to its very existence: and in those contests,
which so often take place between the one and the other, the latter may, on that
account, challenge the preference. Unless perhaps one may say (and it may be said
with some reason) that a circumstance, which is essential to the existence of civil
society, must always support itself, and needs be guarded with less jealousy, than one
that contributes only to its perfection, which the indolence of men is so apt to neglect,
or their ignorance to overlook.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 43 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VI
OF THE INDEPENDENCY OF PARLIAMENTA
Political writers have established it as a maxim, that, in contriving any system of
government, and fixing the several checks and controuls of the constitution, every
man ought to be supposed a knave, and to have no other end, in all his actions, than
private interest. By this interest we must govern him, and, by means of it, make him,
notwithstanding his insatiable avarice and ambition, co-operate to public good.
Without this, say they, we shall in vain boast of the advantages of any constitution,
and shall find, in the end, that we have no security for our liberties or possessions,
except the good-will of our rulers; that is, we shall have no security at all.
It is, therefore, a just political maxim, that every man must be supposed a knave:
Though at the same time, it appears somewhat strange, that a maxim should be true in
politics, which is false in fact. But to satisfy us on this head, we may consider, that
men are generally more honest in their private than in their public capacity, and will
go greater lengths to serve a party, than when their own private interest is alone
concerned. Honour is a great check upon mankind: But where a considerable body of
men act together, this check is, in a great measure, removed; since a man is sure to be
approved of by his own party, for what promotes the common interest; and he soon
learns to despise the clamours of adversaries. To which we may add, that every court
or senate is determined by the greater number of voices; so that, if self-interest
influences only the majority, (as it will always dob ) the whole senate follows the
allurements of this separate interest, and acts as if it contained not one member, who
had any regard to public interest and liberty.
When there offers, therefore, to our censure and examination, any plan of
government, real or imaginary, where the power is distributed among several courts,°
and several orders of men, we should always consider the separate interest of each
court, and each order; and, if we find that, by the skilful division of power, this
interest must necessarily, in its operation, concur with public, we may pronounce that
government to be wise and happy. If, on the contrary, separate interest be not
checked, and be not directed to the public, we ought to look for nothing but faction,
disorder, and tyranny from such a government. In this opinion I am justified by
experience, as well as by the authority of all philosophers and politicians, both antient
and modern.
How much, therefore, would it have surprised such a genius as Cicero, or Tacitus, to
have been told, that, in a future age, there should arise a very regular system of mixed
government, where the authority was so distributed, that one rank, whenever it
pleased, might swallow up all the rest, and engross the whole power of the
constitution. Such a government, they would say, will not be a mixed government.
For so great is the natural ambition of men, that they are never satisfied with power;
and if one order of men, by pursuing its own interest, can usurp upon every other
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 44 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
order, it will certainly do so, and render itself, as far as possible, absolute and
uncontroulable.
But, in this opinion, experience shews they would have been mistaken. For this is
actually the case with the British constitution. The share of power, allotted by our
constitution to the house of commons, is so great, that it absolutely commands all the
other parts of the government. The king’s legislative power is plainly no proper check
to it. For though the king has a negative in framing laws; yet this, in fact, is esteemed
of so little moment, that whatever is voted by the two houses, is always sure to pass
into a law, and the royal assent is little better than a form. The principal weight of the
crown lies in the executive power. But besides that the executive power in every
government is altogether subordinate to the legislative; besides this, I say, the exercise
of this power requires an immense expence; and the commons have assumed to
themselves the sole right of granting money. How easy, therefore, would it be for that
house to wrest from the crown all these powers, one after another; by making every
grant conditional, and choosing their time so well, that their refusal of supply should
only distress the government, without giving foreign powers any advantage over us?
Did the house of commons depend in the same manner on the king, and had none of
the members any property but from his gift, would not he command all their
resolutions, and be from that moment absolute? As to the house of lords, they are a
very powerful support to the Crown, so long as they are, in their turn, supported by it;
but both experience and reason shew, that they have no force or authority sufficient to
maintain themselves alone, without such support.
How, therefore, shall we solve this paradox? And by what means is this member of
our constitution confined within the proper limits; since, from our very constitution, it
must necessarily have as much power as it demands, and can only be confined by
itself? How is this consistent with our experience of human nature? I answer, that the
interest of the body is here restrained by that of the individuals, and that the house of
commons stretches not its power, because such an usurpation would be contrary to the
interest of the majority of its members. The crown has so many offices at its disposal,
that, when assisted by the honest and disinterested part of the house, it will always
command the resolutions of the whole so far, at least, as to preserve the antient
constitution from danger. We may, therefore, give to this influence what name we
please; we may call it by the invidious appellations of corruption and dependence; but
some degree and some kind of it are inseparable from the very nature of the
constitution, and necessary to the preservation of our mixed government.
Instead then of asserting1 absolutely, that the dependence of parliament, in every
degree, is an infringement of British liberty, the country-party should have made some
concessions to their adversaries, and have only examined what was the proper degree
of this dependence, beyond which it became dangerous to liberty. But such a
moderation is not to be expected in party-men of any kind. After a concession of this
nature, all declamation must be abandoned; and a calm enquiry into the proper degree
of court-influence and parliamentary dependence would have been expected by the
readers. And though the advantage, in such a controversy, might possibly remain to
the country-party; yet the victory would not be so compleat as they wish for, nor
would a true patriot have given an entire loose to his zeal, for fear of running matters
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 45 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
into a contrary extreme, by diminishing too2 far the influence of the crown. It was,
therefore, thought best to deny, that this extreme could ever be dangerous to the
constitution, or that the crown could ever have too little influence over members of
parliament.
All questions concerning the proper medium between extremes are difficult to be
decided; both because it is not easy to find words proper to fix this medium, and
because the good and ill, in such cases, run so gradually into each other, as even to
render our sentiments doubtful and uncertain. But there is a peculiar difficulty in the
present case, which would embarrass the most knowing and most impartial examiner.
The power of the crown is always lodged in a single person, either king or minister;
and as this person may have either a greater or less degree of ambition, capacity,
courage, popularity, or fortune, the power, which is too great in one hand, may
become too little in another. In pure republics, where the authority is distributed
among several assemblies or senates, the checks and controuls are more regular in
their operation; because the members of such numerous assemblies may be presumed
to be always nearly equal in capacity and virtue; and it is only their number, riches, or
authority, which enter into consideration. But a limited monarchy admits not of any
such stability; nor is it possible to assign to the crown such a determinate degree of
power, as will, in every hand, form a proper counterbalance to the other parts of the
constitution. This is an unavoidable disadvantage, among the many advantages,
attending that species of government.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 46 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VII
WHETHER THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT INCLINES
MORE TO ABSOLUTE MONARCHY, OR TO A REPUBLIC
It affords a violent° prejudice against almost every science, that no prudent man,
however sure of his principles, dares prophesy concerning any event, or foretel the
remote consequences of things. A physician will not venture to pronounce concerning
the condition of his patient a fortnight or month after: And still less dares a politician
foretel the situation of public affairs a few years hence. Harrington thought himself so
sure of his general principle, that the balance of power depends on that of property,
that he ventured to pronounce it impossible ever to re-establish monarchy in England:
But his book was scarcely published when the king was restored; and we see, that
monarchy has ever since subsisted upon the same footing as before.1 Notwithstanding
this unlucky example, I will venture to examine an important question, to wit,
Whether theBritishgovernment inclines more to absolute monarchy, or to a republic;
and in which of these two species of government it will most probably terminate? As
there seems not to be any great danger of a sudden revolution either way, I shall at
least escape the shame attending my temerity,° if I should be found to have been
mistaken.
Those who assert, that the balance of our government inclines towards absolute
monarchy, may support their opinion by the following reasons. That property has a
great influence on power cannot possibly be denied; but yet the general maxim, that
the balance of one depends on the balance of the other, must be received with several
limitations. It is evident, that much less property in a single hand will be able to
counterbalance a greater property in several; not only because it is difficult to make
many persons combine in the same views and measures; but because property, when
united, causes much greater dependence, than the same property, when dispersed. A
hundred persons, of 1000l. a year a-piece, can consume all their income, and no body
shall ever be the better for them, except their servants and tradesmen, who justly
regard their profits as the product of their own labour. But a man possessed of
100,000l. a year, if he has either any generosity or any cunning, may create a great
dependence by obligations, and still a greater by expectations. Hence we may
observe, that, in all free governments, any subject exorbitantly rich has always created
jealousy, even though his riches bore no proportion to those of the state. Crassus’s
fortune,2 if I remember well, amounted only to about two millions and a half of our
money;a
,
b yet we find, that, though his genius was nothing extraordinary, he was
able, by means of his riches alone, to counterbalance, during his lifetime, the power of
Pompey as well as that of Cæsar, who afterwards became master of the world. The
wealth of the Medici made them masters of Florence;3 though, it is probable, it was
not considerable, compared to the united property of that opulent republic.
These considerations are apt to make one entertain a magnificent idea of the British
spirit and love of liberty; since we could maintain our free government, during so
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 47 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
many centuries, against our sovereigns, who, besides the power and dignity and
majesty of the crown, have always been possessed of much more property than any
subject has ever enjoyed in any commonwealth. But it may be said, that this spirit,
however great, will never be able to support itself against that immense property,
which is now lodged in the king, and which is still encreasing. Upon a moderate
computation, there are near three millions a year at the disposal of the crown. The
civil list amounts to near a million; the collection of all taxes to another; and the
employments in the army and navy, together with ecclesiastical preferments,° to
above a third million: An enormous sum, and what may fairly be computed to be
more than a thirtieth part of the whole income and labour of the kingdom. When we
add to this great property, the encreasing luxury of the nation, our proneness to
corruption, together with the great power and prerogatives of the crown, and the
command of military force, there is no one but must despair of being able, without
extraordinary efforts, to support our free government much longer under these
disadvantages.
On the other hand, those who maintain, that the byass° of the British government
leans towards a republic, may support their opinion by specious° arguments. It may be
said, that, though this immense property in the crown, be joined to the dignity of first
magistrate, and to many other legal powers and prerogatives, which should naturally
give it greater influence; yet it really becomes less dangerous to liberty upon that very
account. Were England a republic, and were any private man possessed of a revenue,
a third, or even a tenth part as large as that of the crown, he would very justly excite
jealousy; because he would infallibly have great authority, in the government: And
such an irregular authority, not avowed by the laws, is always more dangerous than a
much greater authority, derived from them. A man, possessed of usurped power, can
set no bounds to his pretensions:c His partizans have liberty to hope for every thing in
his favour: His enemies provoke his ambition, with his fears, by the violence of their
opposition: And the government being thrown into a ferment, every corrupted humour
in the state naturally gathers to him. On the contrary, a legal authority, though great,
has always some bounds, which terminate both the hopes and pretensions of the
person possessed of it: The laws must have provided a remedy against its excesses:
Such an eminent magistrate has much to fear, and little to hope from his usurpations:
And as his legal authority is quietly submitted to, he has small temptation and small
opportunity of extending it farther. Besides, it happens, with regard to ambitious aims
and projects, what may be observed with regard to sects of philosophy and religion. A
new sect excites such a ferment, and is both opposed and defended with such
vehemence, that it always spreads faster, and multiplies its partizans with greater
rapidity, than any old established opinion, recommended by the sanction of the laws
and of antiquity. Such is the nature of novelty, that, where any thing pleases, it
becomes doubly agreeable, if new; but if it displeases, it is doubly displeasing, upon
that very account. And, in most cases, the violence of enemies is favourable to
ambitious projects, as well as the zeal of partizans.
It may farther be said, that, though men be much governed by interest; yet even
interest itself, and all human affairs, are entirely governed by opinion. Now, there has
been a sudden and sensible change in the opinions of men within these last fifty years,
by the progress of learning and of liberty. Most people, in this island, have divested
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 48 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
themselves of all superstitious reverence to names and authority: The clergy have
much lostd their credit: Their pretensions and doctrines have been ridiculed; and even
religion can scarcely support itself in the world. The mere name of king commands
little respect; and to talk of a king as GOD’s vicegerent° on earth, or to give him any
of those magnificent titles, which formerly dazzled mankind, would but excite
laughter in every one. Though the crown, by means of its large revenue, may maintain
its authority in times of tranquillity, upon private interest and influence; yet, as the
least shock or convulsion must break all these interests to pieces, the royal power,
being no longer supported by the settled principles and opinions of men, will
immediately dissolve. Had men been in the same disposition at the revolution, as they
are at present, monarchy would have run a great risque° of being entirely lost in this
island.
Durst I° venture to deliver my own sentiments amidst these opposite arguments, I
would assert, that, unless there happen some extraordinary convulsion, the power of
the crown, by means of its large revenue, is rather upon the encrease; though, at the
same time I own, that its progress seems very slow, and almost insensible. The tide
has run long, and with some rapidity, to the side of popular government, and is just
beginning to turn towards monarchy.
It is well known, that every government must come to a period,° and that death is
unavoidable to the political as well as to the animal body. But, as one kind of death
may be preferable to another, it may be enquired, whether it be more desirable for the
British constitution to terminate in a popular government, or in absolute monarchy?
Here I would frankly declare, that, though liberty be preferable to slavery, in almost
every case; yet I should rather wish to see an absolute monarch than a republic in this
island. For, let us consider, what kind of republic we have reason to expect. The
question is not concerning any fine imaginary republic, of which a man may form a
plan in his closet.° There is no doubt, but a popular government may be imagined
more perfect than absolute monarchy, or even than our present constitution. But what
reason have we to expect that any such government will ever be established in Great
Britain, upon the dissolution of our monarchy? If any single person acquire power
enough to take our constitution to pieces, and put it up a-new, he is really an absolute
monarch; and we have already had an instance of this kind, sufficient to convince us,
that such a person will never resign his power, or establish any free government.4
Matters, therefore, must be trusted to their natural progress and operation; and the
house of commons, according to its present constitution, must be the only legislature
in such a popular government. The inconveniencies attending such a situation of
affairs, present themselves by thousands. If the house of commons, in such a case,
ever dissolve itself, which is not to be expected, we may look for a civil war every
election. If it continue itself, we shall suffer all the tyranny of a faction, subdivided
into new factions. And, as such a violent government cannot long subsist, we shall, at
last, after many convulsions, and civil wars, find repose in absolute monarchy, which
it would have been happier for us to have established peaceably from the beginning.
Absolute monarchy, therefore, is the easiest death, the true Euthanasia° of the British
constitution.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 49 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Thus, if we have reason to be more jealous of monarchy, because the danger is more
imminent from that quarter; we have also reason to be more jealous of popular
government, because that danger is more terrible. This may teach us a lesson of
moderation in all our political controversies.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 50 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VIII
OF PARTIES IN GENERAL
Of all men, that distinguish themselves by memorable achievements, the first place of
honour seems due to Legislators and founders of states, who transmit a system of laws
and institutions to secure the peace, happiness, and liberty of future generations. The
influence of useful inventions in the arts and sciences may, perhaps, extend farther
than that of wise laws, whose effects are limited both in time and place; but the
benefit arising from the former, is not so sensible as that which results from the latter.
Speculative sciences do, indeed, improve the mind; but this advantage reaches only to
a few persons, who have leisure to apply themselves to them. And as to practical arts,
which encrease the commodities and enjoyments of life, it is well known, that men’s
happiness consists not so much in an abundance of these, as in the peace and security
with which they possess them; and those blessings can only be derived from good
government. Not to mention, that general virtue and good morals in a state, which are
so requisite to happiness, can never arise from the most refined precepts of
philosophy, or even the severest injunctions of religion; but must proceed entirely
from the virtuous education of youth, the effect of wise laws and institutions. I must,
therefore, presume to differ from Lord Bacon in this particular, and must regard
antiquity as somewhat unjust in its distribution of honours, when it made gods of all
the inventors of useful arts, such as Ceres, Bacchus, Æsculapius; and dignify
legislators, such as Romulus and Theseus, only with the appellation of demigods and
heroes.1
As much as legislators and founders of states ought to be honoured and respected
among men, as much ought the founders of sects and factions to be detested and
hated; because the influence of faction is directly contrary to that of laws. Factions
subvert government, render laws impotent, and beget the fiercest animosities among
men of the same nation, who ought to give mutual assistance and protection to each
other. And what should render the founders of parties more odious is, the difficulty of
extirpating° these weeds, when once they have taken root in any state. They naturally
propagate themselves for many centuries, and seldom end but by the total dissolution
of that government, in which they are sown. They are, besides, plants which grow
most plentifully in the richest soil; and though absolute governments be not wholly
free from them, it must be confessed, that they rise more easily, and propagate
themselves faster in free governments, where they always infect the legislature itself,
which alone could be able, by the steady application of rewards and punishments, to
eradicate them.
Factions may be divided into Personal and Real; that is, into factions, founded on
personal friendship or animosity among such as compose the contending parties, and
into those founded on some real difference of sentiment or interest. The reason of this
distinction is obvious; though I must acknowledge, that parties are seldom found pure
and unmixed, either of the one kind or the other. It is not often seen, that a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 51 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
government divides into factions, where there is no difference in the views of the
constituent members, either real or apparent, trivial or material: And in those factions,
which are founded on the most real and most material difference, there is always
observed a great deal of personal animosity or affection. But notwithstanding this
mixture, a party may be denominated either personal or real, according to that
principle which is predominant, and is found to have the greatest influence.
Personal factions arise most easily in small republics. Every domestic quarrel, there,
becomes an affair of state. Love, vanity, emulation, any passion, as well as ambition
and resentment, begets public division. The Neri and Bianchi of Florence, the Fregosi
and Adorni of Genoa, the Colonesi and Orsini of modern Rome, were parties of this
kind.2
Men have such a propensity to divide into personal factions, that the smallest
appearance of real difference will produce them. What can be imagined more trivial
than the difference between one colour of livery and another in horse races? Yet this
difference begat two most inveterate factions in the Greek empire, the Prasini and
Veneti, who never suspended their animosities, till they ruined that unhappy
government.3
We find in the Roman history a remarkable dissension between two tribes, the Pollia
and Papiria, which continued for the space of near three hundred years, and
discovered itself in their suffrages at every election of magistrates.4 This faction was
the more remarkable, as it could continue for so long a tract of time; even though it
did not spread itself, nor draw any of the other tribes into a share of the quarrel. If
mankind had not a strong propensity to such divisions, the indifference of the rest of
the community must have suppressed this foolish animosity, that had not any aliment°
of new benefits and injuries, of general sympathy and antipathy, which never fail to
take place, when the whole state is rent into two equal factions.a
Nothing is more usual than to see parties, which have begun upon a real difference,
continue even after that difference is lost. When men are once inlisted on opposite
sides, they contract an affection to the persons with whom they are united, and an
animosity against their antagonists: And these passions they often transmit to their
posterity. The real difference between Guelf and Ghibbelline was long lost in Italy,
before these factions were extinguished. The Guelfs adhered to the pope, the
Ghibbellines to the emperor; yet the family of Sforza, who were in alliance with the
emperor, though they were Guelfs, being expelled Milan by the king5 of France,
assisted by Jacomo Trivulzio and the Ghibbellines, the pope concurred with the latter,
and they formed leagues with the pope against the emperor.6
The civil wars which arose some few years ago in Morocco, between the blacks and
whites, merely on account of their complexion, are founded on a pleasant difference.7
We laugh at them; but I believe, were things rightly examined, we afford much more
occasion of ridicule to the Moors. For, what are all the wars of religion, which have
prevailed in this polite and knowing part of the world? They are certainly more absurd
than the Moorish civil wars. The difference of complexion is a sensible and a real
difference: But the controversy about an article of faith, which is utterly absurd and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 52 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
unintelligible, is not a difference in sentiment, but in a few phrases and expressions,
which one party accepts of, without understanding them; and the other refuses in the
same manner.c
Real factions may be divided into those from interest, from principle, and from
affection. Of all factions, the first are the most reasonable, and the most excusable.
Where two orders of men, such as the nobles and people, have a distinct authority in a
government, not very accurately balanced and modelled, they naturally follow a
distinct interest; nor can we reasonably expect a different conduct, considering that
degree of selfishness implanted in human nature. It requires great skill in a legislator
to prevent such parties; and many philosophers are of opinion, that this secret, like the
grand elixir, or perpetual motion, may amuse men in theory, but can never possibly
be reduced to practice.8 In despotic governments, indeed, factions often do not
appear; but they are not the less real; or rather, they are more real and more
pernicious, upon that very account. The distinct orders of men, nobles and people,
soldiers and merchants, have all a distinct interest; but the more powerful oppresses
the weaker with impunity, and without resistance; which begets a seeming tranquillity
in such governments.d
There has been an attempt in England to divide the landed and trading part of the
nation; but without success. The interests of these two bodies are not really distinct,
and never will be so, till our public debts encrease to such a degree, as to become
altogether oppressive and intolerable.
Parties from principle, especially abstract speculative principle, are known only to
modern times, and are, perhaps, the most extraordinary and unaccountable
phænomenon, that has yet appeared in human affairs. Where different principles beget
a contrariety° of conduct, which is the case with all different political principles, the
matter may be more easily explained. A man, who esteems the true right of
government to lie in one man, or one family, cannot easily agree with his fellowcitizen,
who thinks that another man or family is possessed of this right. Each
naturally wishes that right may take place, according to his own notions of it. But
where the difference of principle is attended with no contrariety of action, but every
one may follow his own way, without interfering with his neighbour, as happens in all
religious controversies; what madness, what fury can beget such unhappy and such
fatal divisions?
Two men travelling on the highway, the one east, the other west, can easily pass each
other, if the way be broad enough: But two men, reasoning upon opposite principles
of religion, cannot so easily pass, without shocking; though one should think, that the
way were also, in that case, sufficiently broad, and that each might proceed, without
interruption, in his own course. But such is the nature of the human mind, that it
always lays hold on every mind that approaches it; and as it is wonderfully fortified
by an unanimity of sentiments, so is it shocked and disturbed by any contrariety.
Hence the eagerness, which most people discover° in a dispute; and hence their
impatience of opposition, even in the most speculative and indifferent opinions.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 53 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
This principle, however frivolous it may appear, seems to have been the origin of all
religious wars and divisions. But as this principle is universal in human nature, its
effects would not have been confined to one age, and to one sect of religion, did it not
there concur with other more accidental causes, which raise it to such a height, as to
produce the greatest misery and devastation. Most religions of the ancient world arose
in the unknown ages of government, when men were as yet barbarous and
uninstructed, and the prince, as well as peasant, was disposed to receive, with implicit
faith, every pious tale or fiction, which was offered him. The magistrate embraced the
religion of the people, and entering cordially into the care of sacred matters, naturally
acquired an authority in them, and united the ecclesiastical with the civil power. But
the Christian religion arising, while principles directly opposite to it were firmly
established in the polite part of the world, who despised the nation that first broached
this novelty; no wonder, that, in such circumstances, it was but little countenanced by
the civil magistrate, and that the priesthood was allowed to engross all the authority in
the new sect. So bad a use did they make of this power, even in those early times, that
the primitive persecutions may, perhaps, in part,9 be ascribed to the violence instilled
by them into their followers. And the same principles of priestly government
continuing, after Christianity became the established religion, they have engendered a
spirit of persecution, which has ever since been the poison of human society, and the
source of the most inveterate factions in every government. Such divisions, therefore,
on the part of the people, may justly be esteemed factions of principle; but, on the part
of the priests, who are the prime movers, they are really factions of interest.
There is another cause (beside the authority of the priests, and the separation of the
ecclesiastical and civil powers) which has contributed to render Christendom° the
scene of religious wars and divisions. Religions, that arise in ages totally ignorant and
barbarous, consist mostly of traditional tales and fictions, which may be different in
every sect, without being contrary to each other; and even when they are contrary,
every one adheres to the tradition of his own sect, without much reasoning or
disputation. But as philosophy was widely spread over the world, at the time when
Christianity arose, the teachers of the new sect were obliged to form a system of
speculative opinions; to divide, with some accuracy, their articles of faith; and to
explain, comment, confute, and defend with all the subtilty of argument and science.
Hence naturally arose keenness in dispute, when the Christian religion came to be
split into new divisions and heresies: And this keenness assisted the priests in their
policy, of begetting a mutual hatred and antipathy among their deluded followers.
Sects of philosophy, in the ancient world, were more zealous than parties of religion;
but in modern times, parties of religion are more furious and enraged than the most
cruel factions that ever arose from interest and ambition.
I have mentioned parties from affection as a kind of real parties, beside those from
interest and principle. By parties from affection, I understand those which are
founded on the different attachments of men towards particular families and persons,
whom they desire to rule over them. These factions are often very violent; though, I
must own, it may seem unaccountable, that men should attach themselves so strongly
to persons, with whom they are no wise acquainted, whom perhaps they never saw,
and from whom they never received, nor can ever hope for any favour. Yet this we
often find to be the case, and even with men, who, on other occasions, discover no
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 54 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
great generosity of spirit, nor are found to be easily transported by friendship beyond
their own interest. We are apt to think the relation between us and our sovereign very
close and intimate. The splendour of majesty and power bestows an importance on the
fortunes even of a single person. And when a man’s good-nature does not give him
this imaginary interest, his ill-nature will, from spite and opposition to persons whose
sentiments are different from his own.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 55 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY IX
OF THE PARTIES OF GREAT BRITAIN
Were the British government proposed as a subject of speculation, one would
immediately perceive in it a source of division and party, which it would be almost
impossible for it, under any administration, to avoid. The just balance between the
republican and monarchical part of our constitution is really, in itself, so extremely
delicate and uncertain, that, when joined to men’s passions and prejudices, it is
impossible but different opinions must arise concerning it, even among persons of the
best understanding. Those of mild tempers, who love peace and order, and detest
sedition and civil wars, will always entertain more favourable sentiments of
monarchy, than men of bold and generous° spirits, who are passionate lovers of
liberty, and think no evil comparable to subjection and slavery. And though all
reasonable men agree in general to preserve our mixed government; yet, when they
come to particulars, some will incline to trust greater powers to the crown, to bestow
on it more influence, and to guard against its encroachments with less caution, than
others who are terrified at the most distant approaches of tyranny and despotic power.
Thus are there parties of Principle involved in the very nature of our constitution,
which may properly enough be denominated those of Court and Country.a The
strength and violence of each of these parties will much depend upon the particular
administration. An administration may be so bad, as to throw a great majority into the
opposition; as a good administration will reconcile to the court many of the most
passionate lovers of liberty. But however the nation may fluctuate between them, the
parties themselves will always subsist, so long as we are governed by a limited
monarchy.
But, besides this difference of Principle, those parties are very much fomented by a
difference of Interest, without which they could scarcely ever be dangerous or violent.
The crown will naturally bestow all trust and power upon those, whose principles, real
or pretended, are most favourable to monarchical government; and this temptation
will naturally engage them to go greater lengths than their principles would otherwise
carry them. Their antagonists, who are disappointed in their ambitious aims, throw
themselves into the party whose sentiments incline them to be most jealous of royal
power, and naturally carry those sentiments to a greater height than sound politics will
justify. Thus Court and Country, which are the genuine offspring of the British
government, are a kind of mixed parties, and are influenced both by principle and by
interest. The heads of the factions are commonly most governed by the latter motive;
the inferior members of them by the former.b
As to ecclesiastical parties; we may observe, that, in all ages of the world, priests have
been enemies to liberty;c and it is certain, that this steady conduct of theirs must have
been founded on fixed reasons of interest and ambition. Liberty of thinking, and of
expressing our thoughts, is always fatal to priestly power, and to those pious frauds,
on which it is commonly founded; and, by an infallible connexion, which prevails
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 56 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
among all kinds of liberty, this privilege can never be enjoyed, at least has never yet
been enjoyed, but in a free government. Hence it must happen, in such a constitution
as that of Great Britain, that the established clergy, while things are in their natural
situation, will always be of the Court-party; as, on the contrary, dissenters of all kinds
will be of the Country-party; since they can never hope for that toleration, which they
stand in need of, but by means of our free government. All princes, that have aimed at
despotic power, have known of what importance it was to gain the established clergy:
As the clergy, on their part, have shewn a great facility in entering into the views of
such princes.1Gustavus Vaza was, perhaps, the only ambitious monarch, that ever
depressed the church, at the same time that he discouraged liberty. But the exorbitant
power of the bishops in Sweden, who, at that time, overtopped the crown itself,
together with their attachment to a foreign family, was the reason of his embracing
such an unusual system of politics.2
This observation, concerning the propensity of priests to the government of a single
person, is not true with regard to one sect only. The Presbyterian and Calvinistic
clergy in Holland were professed friends to the family of Orange; as the Arminians,
who were esteemed heretics, were of the Louvestein faction, and zealous for liberty.3
But if a prince have the choice of both, it is easy to see, that he will prefer the
episcopal to the presbyterian form of government, both because of the greater affinity
between monarchy and episcopacy, and because of the facility, which he will find, in
such a government, of ruling the clergy, by means of their ecclesiastical superiors.4
If we consider the first rise of parties in England, during the great rebellion,5 we shall
observe, that it was conformable to this general theory, and that the species of
government gave birth to them, by a regular and infallible operation. The English
constitution, before that period, had lain in a kind of confusion; yet so, as that the
subjects possessed many noble privileges, which, though not exactly bounded and
secured by law, were universally deemed, from long possession, to belong to them as
their birth-right. An ambitious, or rather a misguided, prince arose, who deemed all
these privileges to be concessions of his predecessors, revokeable at pleasure; and, in
prosecution of this principle, he openly acted in violation of liberty, during the course
of several years. Necessity, at last, constrained him to call a parliament: The spirit of
liberty arose and spread itself: The prince, being without any support, was obliged to
grant every thing required of him: And his enemies, jealous and implacable, set no
bounds to their pretensions.6 Here then began those contests, in which it was no
wonder, that men of that age were divided into different parties; since, even at this
day, the impartial are at a loss to decide concerning the justice of the quarrel. The
pretensions of the parliament, if yielded to, broke the balance of the constitution, by
rendering the government almost entirely republican. If not yielded to, the nation was,
perhaps, still in danger of absolute power, from the settled principles and inveterate
habits of the king, which had plainly appeared in every concession that he had been
constrained to make to his people. In this question, so delicate and uncertain, men
naturally fell to the side which was most conformable to their usual principles; and the
more passionate favourers of monarchy declared for the king, as the zealous friends of
liberty sided with the parliament. The hopes of success being nearly equal on both
sides, interest had no general influence in this contest: So that Round-head and
Cavalier were merely parties of principle;7 neither of which disowned either
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 57 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
monarchy or liberty; but the former party inclined most to the republican part of our
government, the latter to the monarchical. In this respect, they may be considered as
court and country-party, enflamed into a civil war, by an unhappy concurrence of
circumstances, and by the turbulent spirit of the age. The commonwealth’s men, and
the partizans of absolute power, lay concealed in both parties, and formed but an
inconsiderable part of them.
The clergy had concurred with the king’s arbitrary designs; and, in return, were
allowed to persecute their adversaries, whom they called heretics and schismatics.
The established clergy were episcopal; the non-conformists presbyterian: So that all
things concurred to throw the former, without reserve, into the king’s party; and the
latter into that of the parliament.f
Every one knows the event of this quarrel; fatal to the king first, to the parliament
afterwards. After many confusions and revolutions, the royal family was at last
restored, and the ancient government re-established.8Charles II. was not made wiser
by the example of his father; but prosecuted the same measures, though at first, with
more secrecy and caution. New parties arose, under the appellation of Whig and Tory,
which have continued ever since to confound and distract our government.9 To
determine the nature of these parties is, perhaps, one of the most difficult problems,
that can be met with, and is a proof that history may contain questions, as uncertain as
any to be found in the most abstract sciences. We have seen the conduct of the two
parties, during the course of seventy years, in a vast variety of circumstances,
possessed of power, and deprived of it, during peace, and during war: Persons, who
profess themselves of one side or other, we meet with every hour, in company, in our
pleasures, in our serious occupations: We ourselves are constrained, in a manner, to
take party; and living in a country of the highest liberty, every one may openly declare
all his sentiments and opinions: Yet are we at a loss to tell the nature, pretensions, and
principles of the different factions.g
When we compare the parties of Whig and Tory with those of Round-head and
Cavalier, the most obvious difference, that appears between them, consists in the
principles of passive obedience, and indefeasible right, which were but little heard of
among the Cavaliers, but became the universal doctrine, and were esteemed the true
characteristic of a Tory. Were these principles pushed into their most obvious
consequences, they imply a formal renunciation of all our liberties, and an avowal of
absolute monarchy; since nothing can be a greater absurdity than a limited power,
which must not be resisted, even when it exceeds its limitations. But as the most
rational principles are often but a weak counterpoise° to passion; it is no wonder that
these absurd principlesh were found too weak for that effect. The Tories, as men,
were enemies to oppression; and also as Englishmen, they were enemies to arbitrary
power. Their zeal for liberty, was, perhaps, less fervent than that of their antagonists;
but was sufficient to make them forget all their general principles, when they saw
themselves openly threatened with a subversion of the ancient government. From
these sentiments arose the revolution;10 an event of mighty consequence, and the
firmest foundation of British liberty. The conduct of the Tories, during that event, and
after it, will afford us a true insight into the nature of that party.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 58 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
In the first place, they appear to have had the genuine sentiments of Britons in their
affection for liberty, and in their determined resolution not to sacrifice it to any
abstract principle whatsoever, or to any imaginary rights of princes. This part of their
character might justly have been doubted of before the revolution, from the obvious
tendency of their avowed principles, and from theiri compliances with a court, which
seemed to make little secret of its arbitrary designs. The revolution shewed them to
have been, in this respect, nothing, but a genuine court-party, such as might be
expected in a British government: That is, Lovers of liberty, but greater lovers of
monarchy. It must, however, be confessed, that they carried their monarchical
principles farther, even in practice, but more so in theory, than was, in any degree,
consistent with a limited government.
Secondly, Neither their principles nor affections concurred, entirely or heartily, with
the settlement made at the revolution, or with that which has since taken place. This
part of their character may seem opposite to the former; since any other settlement, in
those circumstances of the nation, must probably have been dangerous, if not fatal to
liberty. But the heart of man is made to reconcile contradictions; and this
contradiction is not greater than that between passive obedience, and the resistance
employed at the revolution. A Tory, therefore, since the revolution, may be defined in
a few words, to be a lover of monarchy, though without abandoning liberty; and a
partizan of the family ofStuart. As a Whig may be defined to be a lover of liberty
though without renouncing monarchy; and a friend to the settlement in
theProtestantline.j
These different views, with regard to the settlement of the crown, were accidental, but
natural additions to the principles of the court and country parties, which are the
genuine divisions in the British government. A passionate lover of monarchy is apt to
be displeased at any change of the succession; as savouring too much of a
commonwealth: A passionate lover of liberty is apt to think that every part of the
government ought to be subordinate to the interests of liberty.
Some, who will not venture to assert, that the real difference between Whig and Tory
was lost at the revolution, seem inclined to think, that the difference is now abolished,
and that affairs are so far returned to their natural state, that there are at present no
other parties among us but court and country; that is, men, who, by interest or
principle, are attached either to monarchy or liberty. The Tories have been so long
obliged to talk in the republican stile, that they seem to have made converts of
themselves by their hypocrisy, and to have embraced the sentiments, as well as
language of their adversaries. There are, however, very considerable remains of that
party in England, with all their old prejudices; and a proof that court and country are
not our only parties, is, that almost all the dissenters side with the court, and the lower
clergy, at least, of the church of England, with the opposition. This may convince us,
that some biass still hangs upon our constitution, some extrinsic weight, which turns it
from its natural course, and causes a confusion in our parties.11,
k
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 59 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY X
OF SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM
That the corruption of the best things produces the worst, is grown into a maxim, and
is commonly proved, among other instances, by the pernicious effects of superstition
and enthusiasm, the corruptions of true religion.
These two species of false religion, though both pernicious,° are yet of a very
different, and even of a contrary nature. The mind of man is subject to certain
unaccountable terrors and apprehensions, proceeding either from the unhappy
situation of private or public affairs, from ill health, from a gloomy and melancholy
disposition, or from the concurrence of all these circumstances. In such a state of
mind, infinite unknown evils are dreaded from unknown agents; and where real
objects of terror are wanting, the soul, active to its own prejudice, and fostering its
predominant inclination, finds imaginary ones, to whose power and malevolence it
sets no limits. As these enemies are entirely invisible and unknown, the methods
taken to appease them are equally unaccountable,° and consist in ceremonies,
observances, mortifications, sacrifices, presents, or in any practice, however absurd or
frivolous, which either folly or knavery recommends to a blind and terrified
credulity.° Weakness, fear, melancholy, together with ignorance, are, therefore, the
true sources of Superstition.
But the mind of man is also subject to an unaccountable elevation and presumption,
arising from prosperous success, from luxuriant health, from strong spirits, or from a
bold and confident disposition. In such a state of mind, the imagination swells with
great, but confused conceptions, to which no sublunary° beauties or enjoyments can
correspond. Every thing mortal and perishable vanishes as unworthy of attention. And
a full range is given to the fancy in the invisible regions or world of spirits, where the
soul is at liberty to indulge itself in every imagination, which may best suit its present
taste and disposition. Hence arise raptures,°transports,° and surprising flights of
fancy; and confidence and presumption still encreasing, these raptures, being
altogether unaccountable, and seeming quite beyond the reach of our ordinary
faculties, are attributed to the immediate inspiration of that Divine Being, who is the
object of devotion. In a little time, the inspired person comes to regard himself as a
distinguished favourite of the Divinity; and when this frenzy once takes place, which
is the summit of enthusiasm, every whimsy is consecrated: Human reason, and even
morality are rejected as fallacious guides: And the fanatic madman delivers himself
over, blindly, and without reserve, to the supposed illapses° of the spirit, and to
inspiration from above. Hope, pride, presumption, a warm imagination, together with
ignorance, are, therefore, the true sources of Enthusiasm.
These two species of false religion might afford occasion to many speculations; but I
shall confine myself, at present, to a few reflections concerning their different
influence on government and society.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 60 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
a My first reflection is, That superstition is favourable to priestly power, and
enthusiasm not less or rather more contrary to it, than sound reason and philosophy.
As superstition is founded on fear, sorrow, and a depression of spirits, it represents the
man to himself in such despicable colours, that he appears unworthy, in his own eyes,
of approaching the divine presence, and naturally has recourse to any other person,
whose sanctity of life, or, perhaps, impudence and cunning, have made him be
supposed more favoured by the Divinity. To him the superstitious entrust their
devotions: To his care they recommend their prayers, petitions, and sacrifices: And by
his means, they hope to render their addresses° acceptable to their incensed° Deity.
Hence the origin of Priests,b who may justly be regardedc as an invention of a
timorous and abject superstition, which, ever diffident° of itself, dares not offer up its
own devotions, but ignorantly thinks to recommend itself to the Divinity, by the
mediation of his supposed friends and servants. As superstition is a considerable
ingredient in almost all religions, even the most fanatical; there being nothing but
philosophy able entirely to conquer these unaccountable terrors; hence it proceeds,
that in almost every sect of religion there are priests to be found: But the stronger
mixture there is of superstition, the higher is the authority of the priesthood.d
On the other hand, it may be observed, that all enthusiasts have been free from the
yoke of ecclesiastics, and have expressed great independence in their devotion; with a
contempt of forms, ceremonies, and traditions. The quakers1 are the most egregious,°
though, at the same time, the most innocent enthusiasts that have yet been known; and
are, perhaps, the only sect, that have never admitted priests amongst them. The
independents,2 of all the English sectaries, approach nearest to the quakers in
fanaticism, and in their freedom from priestly bondage. The presbyterians3 follow
after, at an equal distance in both particulars. In short this observation is founded in
experience; and will also appear to be founded in reason, if we consider, that, as
enthusiasm arises from a presumptuous pride and confidence, it thinks itself
sufficiently qualified to approach the Divinity, without any human mediator. Its
rapturous devotions are so fervent, that it even imagines itself actually to approach
him by the way of contemplation and inward converse; which makes it neglect all
those outward ceremonies and observances, to which the assistance of the priests
appears so requisite in the eyes of their superstitious votaries.° The fanatic consecrates
himself, and bestows on his own person a sacred character, much superior to what
forms and ceremonious institutions can confer on any other.
My second reflection with regard to these species of false religion is, that religions,
which partake of enthusiasm are, on their first rise, more furious and violent than
those which partake of superstition; but in a little time become more gentle and
moderate. The violence of this species of religion, when excited by novelty, and
animated by opposition, appears from numberless instances; of the anabaptists4 in
Germany, the camisars5 in France, the levellers6 and other fanatics in England, and
the covenanters7 in Scotland. Enthusiasm being founded on strong spirits, and a
presumptuous boldness of character, it naturally begets the most extreme resolutions;
especially after it rises to that height as to inspire the deluded fanatic with the opinion
of divine illuminations, and with a contempt for the common rules of reason,
morality, and prudence.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 61 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
It is thus enthusiasm produces the most cruel disorders in human society; but its fury
is like that of thunder and tempest, which exhaust themselves in a little time, and
leave the air more calm and serene than before. When the first fire of enthusiasm is
spent, men naturally, in all fanatical sects, sink into the greatest remissness° and
coolness in sacred matters; there being no body of men among them, endowed with
sufficient authority, whose interest is concerned to support the religious spirit: No
rites, no ceremonies, no holy observances, which may enter into the common train of
life, and preserve the sacred principles from oblivion. Superstition, on the contrary,
steals in gradually and insensibly; renders men tame and submissive; is acceptable to
the magistrate, and seems inoffensive to the people: Till at last the priest, having
firmly established his authority, becomes the tyrant and disturber of human society,
by his endless contentions, persecutions, and religious wars. How smoothly did the
Romish church° advance in her acquisition of power? But into what dismal
convulsions did she throw all Europe, in order to maintain it? On the other hand, our
sectaries,° who were formerly such dangerous bigots, are now become very free
reasoners; and the quakers seem to approach nearly the only regular° body of deists8
in the universe, the literati, or the disciples of Confucius in China.9
My third observation on this head is, that superstition is an enemy to civil liberty, and
enthusiasm a friend to it. As superstition groans under the dominion of priests, and
enthusiasm is destructive of all ecclesiastical power, this sufficiently accounts for the
present observation. Not to mention, that enthusiasm, being the infirmity° of bold and
ambitious tempers, is naturally accompanied with a spirit of liberty; as superstition, on
the contrary, renders men tame and abject,° and fits them for slavery. We learn from
English history, that, during the civil wars, the independents and deists, though the
most opposite in their religious principles; yet were united in their political ones, and
were alike passionate for a commonwealth. And since the origin of whig and tory, the
leaders of the whigs have either been deists or profest latitudinarians in their
principles; that is, friends to toleration, and indifferent to any particular sect of
christians: While the sectaries, who have all a strong tincture of enthusiasm, have
always, without exception, concurred with that party, in defence of civil liberty. The
resemblance in their superstitions long united the high-church tories, and the Roman
catholics, in support of prerogative° and kingly power; though experience of the
tolerating spirit of the whigs seems of late to have reconciled the catholics to that
party.
The molinists and jansenists in France have a thousand unintelligible disputes,10
which are not worthy the reflection of a man of sense: But what principally
distinguishes these two sects, and alone merits attention, is the different spirit of their
religion. The molinists conducted by the jesuits, are great friends to superstition, rigid
observers of external forms and ceremonies, and devoted to the authority of the
priests, and to tradition. The jansenists are enthusiasts, and zealous promoters of the
passionate devotion, and of the inward life; little influenced by authority; and, in a
word, but half catholics. The consequences are exactly conformable to the foregoing
reasoning. The jesuits are the tyrants of the people, and the slaves of the court: And
the jansenists preserve alive the small sparks of the love of liberty, which are to be
found in the French nation.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 62 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XI
OF THE DIGNITY OR MEANNESS OF HUMAN NATUREA
There are certain sects, which secretly form themselves in the learned world, as well
as factions in the political; and though sometimes they come not to an open rupture,
they give a different turn to the ways of thinking of those who have taken part on
either side. The most remarkable of this kind are the sects, founded on the different
sentiments with regard to the dignity of human nature; which is a point that seems to
have divided philosophers and poets, as well as divines,° from the beginning of the
world to this day. Some exalt our species to the skies, and represent man as a kind of
human demigod, who derives his origin from heaven, and retains evident marks of his
lineage and descent. Others insist upon the blind sides of human nature, and can
discover nothing, except vanity, in which man surpasses the other animals, whom he
affects so much to despise. If an author possess the talent of rhetoric and declamation,
he commonly takes part with the former: If his turn lie towards irony and ridicule, he
naturally throws himself into the other extreme.
I am far from thinking, that all those, who have depreciated our species, have been
enemies to virtue, and have exposed the frailties of their fellow creatures with any bad
intention. On the contrary, I am sensible that a delicate sense of morals, especially
when attended with a splenetic° temper,b is apt to give a man a disgust of the world,
and to make him consider the common course of human affairs with too much
indignation. I must, however, be of opinion, that the sentiments of those, who are
inclined to think favourably of mankind, are more advantageous to virtue, than the
contrary principles, which give us a mean opinion of our nature. When a man is
prepossessed with a high notion of his rank and character in the creation, he will
naturally endeavour to act up to it, and will scorn to do a base or vicious action, which
might sink him below that figure which he makes in his own imagination.
Accordingly we find, that all our polite and fashionable moralists insist upon this
topic, and endeavour to represent vice as unworthy of man, as well as odious° in
itself.c
We find few disputes, that are not founded on some ambiguity in the expression; and I
am persuaded, that the present dispute, concerning the dignity or meanness of human
nature, is not more exempt from it than any other. It may, therefore, be worth while to
consider, what is real, and what is only verbal, in this controversy.
That there is a natural difference between merit and demerit, virtue and vice, wisdom
and folly, no reasonable man will deny: Yet is it evident, that in affixing the term,
which denotes either our approbation or blame, we are commonly more influenced by
comparison than by any fixed unalterable standard in the nature of things. In like
manner, quantity, and extension, and bulk, are by every one acknowledged to be real
things: But when we call any animal great or little, we always form a secret
comparison between that animal and others of the same species; and it is that
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 63 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
comparison which regulates our judgment concerning its greatness. A dog and a horse
may be of the very same size, while the one is admired for the greatness of its bulk,
and the other for the smallness. When I am present, therefore, at any dispute, I always
consider with myself, whether it be a question of comparison or not that is the subject
of the controversy; and if it be, whether the disputants compare the same objects
together, or talk of things that are widely different.d
In forming our notions of human nature, we are apt to make a comparison between
men and animals, the only creatures endowed with thought that fall under our senses.
Certainly this comparison is favourable to mankind. On the one hand, we see a
creature, whose thoughts are not limited by any narrow bounds, either of place or
time; who carries his researches into the most distant regions of this globe, and
beyond this globe, to the planets and heavenly bodies; looks backward to consider the
first origin, at least, the history of human race; casts his eye forward to see the
influence of his actions upon posterity, and the judgments which will be formed of his
character a thousand years hence; a creature, who traces causes and effects to a great
length and intricacy; extracts general principles from particular appearances;
improves upon his discoveries; corrects his mistakes; and makes his very errors
profitable. On the other hand, we are presented with a creature the very reverse of
this; limited in its observations and reasonings to a few sensible objects which
surround it; without curiosity, without foresight; blindly conducted by instinct, and
attaining, in a short time, its utmost perfection, beyond which it is never able to
advance a single step. What a wide difference is there between these creatures! And
how exalted a notion must we entertain of the former, in comparison of the latter!
There are two means commonly employed to destroy this conclusion: First, By
making an unfair representation of the case, and insisting only upon the weaknesses of
human nature. And secondly, By forming a new and secret comparison between man
and beings of the most perfect wisdom. Among the other excellencies of man, this is
one, that he can form an idea of perfections much beyond what he has experience of
in himself; and is not limited in his conception of wisdom and virtue. He can easily
exalt his notions and conceive a degree of knowledge, which, when compared to his
own, will make the latter appear very contemptible, and will cause the difference
between that and the sagacity of animals, in a manner, to disappear and vanish. Now
this being a point, in which all the world is agreed, that human understanding falls
infinitely short of perfect wisdom; it is proper we should know when this comparison
takes place, that we may not dispute where there is no real difference in our
sentiments. Man falls much more short of perfect wisdom, and even of his own ideas
of perfect wisdom, than animals do of man; yet the latter difference is so considerable,
that nothing but a comparison with the former can make it appear of little moment.
It is also usual to compare one man with another; and finding very few whom we can
call wise or virtuous, we are apt to entertain a contemptible notion of our species in
general. That we may be sensible of the fallacy of this way of reasoning, we may
observe, that the honourable appellations of wise and virtuous, are not annexed to any
particular degree of those qualities of wisdom and virtue; but arise altogether from the
comparison we make between one man and another. When we find a man, who
arrives at such a pitch of wisdom as is very uncommon, we pronounce him a wise
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 64 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
man: So that to say, there are few wise men in the world, is really to say nothing;
since it is only by their scarcity, that they merit that appellation. Were the lowest of
our species as wise as Tully, or lord Bacon,1 we should still have reason to say, that
there are few wise men. For in that case we should exalt our notions of wisdom, and
should not pay a singular honour to any one, who was not singularly distinguished by
his talents. In like manner, I have heard it observed by thoughtless people, that there
are few women possessed of beauty, in comparison of those who want it; not
considering, that we bestow the epithet of beautiful only on such as possess a degree
of beauty, that is common to them with a few. The same degree of beauty in a woman
is called deformity, which is treated as real beauty in one of our sex.
As it is usual, in forming a notion of our species, to compare it with the other species
above or below it, or to compare the individuals of the species among themselves; so
we often compare together the different motives or actuating principles of human
nature, in order to regulate our judgment concerning it. And, indeed, this is the only
kind of comparison, which is worth our attention, or decides any thing in the present
question. Were our selfish and vicious principles so much predominant above our
social and virtuous, as is asserted by some philosophers, we ought undoubtedly to
entertain a contemptible notion of human nature.2
There is much of a dispute of words in all this controversy. When a man denies the
sincerity of all public spirit or affection to a country and community, I am at a loss
what to think of him. Perhaps he never felt this passion in so clear and distinct a
manner as to remove all his doubts concerning its force and reality. But when he
proceeds afterwards to reject all private friendship, if no interest or self-love intermix
itself; I am then confident that he abuses terms, and confounds the ideas of things;
since it is impossible for any one to be so selfish, or rather so stupid, as to make no
difference between one man and another, and give no preference to qualities, which
engage his approbation and esteem. Is he also, say I, as insensible to anger as he
pretends to be to friendship? And does injury and wrong no more affect him than
kindness or benefits? Impossible: He does not know himself: He has forgotten the
movements of his heart; or rather he makes use of a different language from the rest
of his countrymen, and calls not things by their proper names. What say you of
natural affection? (I subjoin° ) Is that also a species of self-love? Yes: All is self-love.
Your children are loved only because they are yours: Your friend for a like reason:
And your country engages you only so far as it has a connexion with yourself: Were
the idea of self removed, nothing would affect you: You would be altogether unactive
and insensible: Or, if you ever gave yourself any movement, it would only be from
vanity, and a desire of fame and reputation to this same self. I am willing, reply I, to
receive your interpretation of human actions, provided you admit the facts. That
species of self-love, which displays itself in kindness to others, you must allow to
have great influence over human actions, and even greater, on many occasions, than
that which remains in its original shape and form. For how few are there, who, having
a family, children, and relations, do not spend more on the maintenance and education
of these than on their own pleasures? This, indeed, you justly observe, may proceed
from their self-love, since the prosperity of their family and friends is one, or the chief
of their pleasures, as well as their chief honour. Be you also one of these selfish men,
and you are sure of every one’s good opinion and good will; or not to shock your ears
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 65 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
with these expressions, the self-love of every one, and mine among the rest, will then
incline us to serve you, and speak well of you.e
In my opinion, there are two things which have led astray those philosophers, that
have insisted so much on the selfishness of man. In the first place, they found, that
every act of virtue or friendship was attended with a secret pleasure; whence they
concluded, that friendship and virtue could not be disinterested. But the fallacy of this
is obvious. The virtuous sentiment or passion produces the pleasure, and does not
arise from it. I feel a pleasure in doing good to my friend, because I love him; but do
not love him for the sake of that pleasure.
In the second place, it has always been found, that the virtuous are far from being
indifferent to praise; and therefore they have been represented as a set of vainglorious
men, who had nothing in view but the applauses of others. But this also is a
fallacy. It is very unjust in the world, when they find any tincture° of vanity in a
laudable action, to depreciate it upon that account, or ascribe it entirely to that motive.
The case is not the same with vanity, as with other passions. Where avarice or
revenge enters into any seemingly virtuous action, it is difficult for us to determine
how far it enters, and it is natural to suppose it the sole actuating principle. But vanity
is so closely allied to virtue, and to love the fame of laudable actions approaches so
near the love of laudable actions for their own sake, that these passions are more
capable of mixture, than any other kinds of affection; and it is almost impossible to
have the latter without some degree of the former. Accordingly, we find, that this
passion for glory is always warped and varied according to the particular taste or
disposition of the mind on which it falls. Nero had the same vanity in driving a
chariot, that Trajan had in governing the empire with justice and ability.3 To love the
glory of virtuous deeds is a sure proof of the love of virtue.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 66 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XII
OF CIVIL LIBERTYA
Those who employ their pens on political subjects, free from party-rage, and partyprejudices,
cultivate a science, which, of all others, contributes most to public utility,
and even to the private satisfaction of those who addict themselves to the study of it. I
am apt, however, to entertain a suspicion, that the world is still too young to fix many
general truths in politics, which will remain true to the latest posterity. We have not as
yet had experience of three thousand years; so that not only the art of reasoning is still
imperfect in this science, as in all others, but we even want sufficient materials upon
which we can reason. It is not fully known, what degree of refinement, either in virtue
or vice, human nature is susceptible of; nor what may be expected of mankind from
any great revolution in their education, customs, or principles. Machiavel was
certainly a great genius; but having confined his study to the furious and tyrannical
governments of ancient times, or to the little disorderly principalities of Italy, his
reasonings especially upon monarchical government, have been found extremely
defective; and there scarcely is any maxim in his prince, which subsequent experience
has not entirely refuted. A weak prince, says he, is incapable of receiving good
counsel; for if he consult with several, he will not be able to choose among their
different counsels. If he abandon himself to one, that minister may, perhaps, have
capacity; but he will not long be a minister: He will be sure to dispossess his master,
and place himself and his family upon the throne.1 I mention this, among many
instances of the errors of that politician, proceeding, in a great measure, from his
having lived in too early an age of the world, to be a good judge of political truth.
Almost all the princes of Europe are at present governed by their ministers; and have
been so for near two centuries; and yet no such event has ever happened, or can
possibly happen. Sejanus might project dethroning the Cæsars; but Fleury,2 though
ever so vicious, could not, while in his senses, entertain the least hopes of
dispossessing the Bourbons.
Trade was never esteemed an affair of state till the last century; and there scarcely is
any ancient writer on politics, who has made mention of it.3 Even the Italians have
kept a profound silence with regard to it, though it has now engaged the chief
attention, as well of ministers of state, as of speculative reasoners. The great opulence,
grandeur, and military achievements of the two maritime powers4 seem first to have
instructed mankind in the importance of an extensive commerce.
Having, therefore, intended in this essay to make a full comparison of civil liberty and
absolute government, and to showc the great advantages of the former above the
latter; I began to entertain a suspicion, that no man in this age was sufficiently
qualified for such an undertaking; and that whatever any one should advance on that
head would, in all probability, be refuted by further experience, and be rejected by
posterity. Such mighty revolutions have happened in human affairs, and so many
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 67 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
events have arisen contrary to the expectation of the ancients, that they are sufficient
to beget the suspicion of still further changes.
It had been observed by the ancients, that all the arts and sciences arose among free
nations; and, that the Persians and Egyptians, notwithstanding their ease, opulence,
and luxury, made but faint efforts towards a relish in those finer pleasures, which
were carried to such perfection by the Greeks, amidst continual wars, attended with
poverty, and the greatest simplicity of life and manners. It had also been observed,
that, when the Greeks lost their liberty, though they increased mightily in riches, by
means of the conquests of Alexander; yet the arts, from that moment, declined among
them, and have never since been able to raise their head in that climate. Learning was
transplanted to Rome, the only free nation at that time in the universe; and having met
with so favourable a soil, it made prodigious shoots for above a century; till the decay
of liberty produced also the decay of letters, and spread a total barbarism over the
world. From these two experiments, of which each was double in its kind, and shewed
the fall of learning in absolute governments, as well as its rise in popular ones,
Longinus thought himself sufficiently justified, in asserting, that the arts and sciences
could never flourish, but in a free government:5 And in this opinion, he has been
followed by several eminent writers6 in our own country, who either confined their
view merely to ancient facts, or entertained too great a partiality in favour of that form
of government, established amongst us.
But what would these writers have said, to the instances of modern Rome and of
Florence? Of which the former carried to perfection all the finer arts of sculpture,
painting, and music, as well as poetry, though it groaned under tyranny, and under the
tyranny of priests: While the latter made its chief progress in the arts and sciences,
after it began to lose its liberty by the usurpation of the family of Medici. Ariosto,
Tasso, Galileo, more than Raphael, and Michael Angelo, were not born in republics.7
And though the Lombard school was famous as well as the Roman, yet the Venetians
have had the smallest share in its honours, and seem rather inferior to the other
Italians, in their genius for the arts and sciences. Rubens established his school at
Antwerp, not at Amsterdam: Dresden, not Hamburgh, is the centre of politeness in
Germany.8
But the most eminent instance of the flourishing of learning in absolute governments,
is that of France, which scarcely ever enjoyed any established liberty, and yet has
carried the arts and sciences as near perfection as any other nation. The English are,
perhaps, greater philosophers;d the Italians better painters and musicians; the Romans
were greater orators: But the French are the only people, except the Greeks, who have
been at once philosophers, poets, orators, historians, painters, architects, sculptors,
and musicians. With regard to the stage, they have excelled even the Greeks, who far
excelled the English.e And, in common life, they have, in a great measure, perfected
that art, the most useful and agreeable of any, l’Art de Vivre, the art of society and
conversation.
If we consider the state of the sciences and polite arts in our own country, Horace’s
observation, with regard to the Romans, may, in a great measure, be applied to the
British.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 68 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
—Sed in longum tamen ævum
Manserunt, hodieque manent vestigia ruris.9
The elegance and propriety of style have been very much neglected among us. We
have no dictionary of our language, and scarcely a tolerable grammar. The first polite
prose we have, was writ by a man who is still alive.10 As to Sprat, Locke and, even
Temple, they knew too little of the rules of art to be esteemed elegant writers.11 The
prose of Bacon, Harrington, and Milton,12 is altogether stiff and pedantic; though
their sense be excellent. Men, in this country, have been so much occupied in the
great disputes of Religion, Politics, and Philosophy, that they had no relish for the
seemingly minute observations of grammar and criticism. And though this turn of
thinking must have considerably improved our sense and our talent of reasoning; it
must be confessed, that, even in those sciences above-mentioned, we have not any
standard-book, which we can transmit to posterity: And the utmost we have to boast
of, are a few essays towards a more just° philosophy; which, indeed, promise well,
but have not, as yet, reached any degree of perfection.
It has become an established opinion, that commerce can never flourish but in a free
government; and this opinion seems to be founded on a longer and larger experience
than the foregoing, with regard to the arts and sciences. If we trace commerce in its
progress through Tyre, Athens, Syracuse, Carthage, Venice, Florence, Genoa,
Antwerp, Holland, England, &c. we shall always find it to have fixed its seat in free
governments. The three greatest trading towns now in Europe, are London,
Amsterdam, and Hamburgh; all free cities, and protestant cities; that is, enjoying a
double liberty. It must, however, be observed, that the great jealousy entertained of
late, with regard to the commerce of France, seems to prove, that this maxim is no
more certain and infallible than the foregoing, and that the subjects of an absolute
prince may become our rivals in commerce, as well as in learning.
Durst I deliver my opinion in an affair of so much uncertainty, I would assert, that,
notwithstanding the efforts of the French, there is something hurtful to commerce
inherent in the very nature of absolute government, and inseparable from it: Though
the reason I should assign for this opinion, is somewhat different from that which is
commonly insisted on. Private property seems to me almost as secure in a civilized
European monarchy, as in a republic; nor is danger much apprehended in such a
government, from the violence of the sovereign; more than we commonly dread harm
from thunder, or earthquakes, or any accident the most unusual and extraordinary.
Avarice, the spur of industry, is so obstinate a passion, and works its way through so
many real dangers and difficulties, that it is not likely to be scared by an imaginary
danger, which is so small, that it scarcely admits of calculation. Commerce, therefore,
in my opinion, is apt to decay in absolute governments, not because it is there less
secure, but because it is less honourable. A subordination of ranks is absolutely
necessary to the support of monarchy. Birth, titles, and place, must be honoured above
industry and riches. And while these notions prevail, all the considerable traders will
be tempted to throw up their commerce, in order to purchase some of those
employments, to which privileges and honours are annexed.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 69 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Since I am upon this head,° of the alterations which time has produced, or may
produce in politics, I must observe, that all kinds of government, free and absolute,
seem to have undergone, in modern times, a great change for the better, with regard
both to foreign and domestic management. The balance of power is a secret in
politics, fully known only to the present age; and I must add, that the internal Police°
of states has also received great improvements within the last century. We are
informed by Sallust, that Catiline’s army was much augmented by the accession of the
highwaymen about Rome;13 though I believe, that all of that profession, who are at
present dispersed over Europe, would not amount to a regiment. In Cicero’s pleadings
for Milo, I find this argument, among others, made use of to prove, that his client had
not assassinated Clodius. Had Milo, said he, intended to have killed Clodius, he had
not attacked him in the daytime, and at such a distance from the city: He had way-laid
him at night, near the suburbs, where it might have been pretended, that he was killed
by robbers; and the frequency of the accident would have favoured the deceit. This is
a surprizing proof of the loose police of Rome, and of the number and force of these
robbers; since Clodius14 was at that time attended by thirty slaves, who were
completely armed, and sufficiently accustomed to blood and danger in the frequent
tumults excited by that seditious tribune.f
But though all kinds of government be improved in modern times, yet monarchical
government seems to have made the greatest advances towards perfection. It may now
be affirmed of civilized monarchies, what was formerly said in praise of republics
alone, that they are a government of Laws, not of Men. They are found susceptible of
order, method, and constancy, to a surprizing degree. Property is there secure;
industry encouraged; the arts flourish; and the prince lives secure among his subjects,
like a father among his children. There are perhaps, and have been for two centuries,
near two hundred absolute princes, great and small, in Europe; and allowing twenty
years to each reign, we may suppose, that there have been in the whole two thousand
monarchs or tyrants, as the Greeks would have called them: Yet of these there has not
been one, not even Philip II. of Spain, so bad as Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, or
Domitian,15 who were four in twelve amongst the Roman emperors.g It must,
however, be confessed, that, though monarchical governments have approached
nearer to popular ones, in gentleness and stability; they are still inferior. Our modern
education and customs instil more humanity and moderation than the ancient; but
have not as yet been able to overcome entirely the disadvantages of that form of
government.
But here I must beg leave to advance a conjecture, which seems probable, but which
posterity alone can fully judge of. I am apt to think, that, in monarchical governments
there is a source of improvement, and in popular governments a source of degeneracy,
which in time will bring these species of civil polity still nearer an equality. The
greatest abuses, which arise in France, the most perfect model of pure monarchy,
proceed not from the number or weight of the taxes, beyond what are to be met with
in free countries; but from the expensive, unequal, arbitrary, and intricate method of
levying them, by which the industry of the poor, especially of the peasants and
farmers, is, in a great measure, discouraged, and agriculture rendered a beggarly and
slavish employment. But to whose advantage do these abuses tend? If to that of the
nobility, they might be esteemed inherent in that form of government; since the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 70 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
nobility are the true supports of monarchy; and it is natural their interest should be
more consulted, in such a constitution, than that of the people. But the nobility are, in
reality, the chief losers by this oppression; since it ruins their estates, and beggars°
their tenants. The only gainers by it are the Finançiers,h a race of men rather odious
to the nobility and the whole kingdom. If a prince or minister, therefore, should arise,
endowed with sufficient discernment to know his own and the public interest, and
with sufficient force of mind to break through ancient customs, we might expect to
see these abuses remedied; in which case, the difference between that absolute
government and our free one, would not appear so considerable as at present.
The source of degeneracy, which may be remarked in free governments, consists in
the practice of contracting debt, and mortgaging the public revenues, by which taxes
may, in time, become altogether intolerable, and all the property of the state be
brought into the hands of the public. This practice is of modern date. The Athenians,i
though governed by a republic, paid near two hundred per Cent. for those sums of
money, which any emergence made it necessary for them to borrow; as we learn from
Xenophon.16 Among the moderns, the Dutch first introduced the practice of
borrowing great sums at low interest, and have well nigh ruined themselves by it.
Absolute princes have also contracted debt; but as an absolute prince may make a
bankruptcy when he pleases, his people can never be oppressed by his debts. In
popular governments, the people, and chiefly those who have the highest offices,
being commonly the public creditors, it is difficult for the state to make use of this
remedy, which, however it may sometimes be necessary, is always cruel and
barbarous. This, therefore seems to be an inconvenience, which nearly threatens all
free governments; especially our own, at the present juncture of affairs. And what a
strong motive is this, to encrease our frugality of public money; lest for want of it, we
be reduced, by the multiplicity of taxes, or what is worse, by our public impotence
and inability for defence, to curse our very liberty, and wish ourselves in the same
state of servitude with all the nations that surround us?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 71 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XIII
OF ELOQUENCE
Those, who consider the periods and revolutions of human kind, as represented in
history, are entertained with a spectacle full of pleasure and variety, and see, with
surprize, the manners, customs, and opinions of the same species susceptible of such
prodigious changes in different periods of time. It may, however, be observed, that, in
civil history, there is found a much greater uniformity than in the history of learning
and science, and that the wars, negociations, and politics of one age resemble more
those of another, than the taste, wit, and speculative principles. Interest and ambition,
honour and shame, friendship and enmity, gratitude and revenge, are the prime
movers in all public transactions; and these passions are of a very stubborn and
intractable nature, in comparison of the sentiments and understanding, which are
easily varied by education and example. The Goths were much more inferior to the
Romans, in taste and science, than in courage and virtue.
But not to compare together nations so widely different;a it may be observed, that
even this later period of human learning is, in many respects, of an opposite character
to the ancient; and that, if we be superior in philosophy, we are still, notwithstanding
all our refinements, much inferior in eloquence.
In ancient times, no work of genius was thought to require so great parts and capacity,
as the speaking in public; and some eminent writers have pronounced the talents, even
of a great poet or philosopher, to be of an inferior nature to those which are requisite
for such an undertaking. Greece and Rome produced, each of them, but one
accomplished orator; and whatever praises the other celebrated speakers might merit,
they were still esteemed much inferior to these great models of eloquence. It is
observable, that the ancient critics could scarcely find two orators in any age, who
deserved to be placed precisely in the same rank, and possessed the same degree of
merit. Calvus, Cælius, Curio, Hortensius, Cæsar rose one above another:1 But the
greatest of that age was inferior to Cicero, the most eloquent speaker, that had ever
appeared in Rome. Those of fine taste, however, pronounced this judgment of the
Roman orator, as well as of the Grecian, that both of them surpassed in eloquence all
that had ever appeared, but that they were far from reaching the perfection of their art,
which was infinite, and not only exceeded human force to attain, but human
imagination to conceive. Cicero declares himself dissatisfied with his own
performances; nay, even with those of Demosthenes. Ita sunt avidæ & capaces meæ
aures, says he, & semper aliquid immensum, infinitumque desiderant.2
,
b
Of all the polite and learned nations, England alone possesses a popular government,
or admits into the legislature such numerous assemblies as can be supposed to lie
under the dominion of eloquence. But what has England to boast of in this particular?
In enumerating the great men, who have done honour to our country, we exult in our
poets and philosophers; but what orators are ever mentioned? Or where are the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 72 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
monuments of their genius to be met with? There are found, indeed, in our histories,
the names of several, who directed the resolutions of our parliament: But neither
themselves nor others have taken the pains to preserve their speeches; and the
authority, which they possessed, seems to have been owing to their experience,
wisdom, or power, more than to their talents for oratory. At present, there are above
half a dozen speakers in the two houses, who, in the judgment of the public, have
reached very near the same pitch of eloquence; and no man pretends to give any one
the preference above the rest. This seems to me a certain proof, that none of them
have attained much beyond a mediocrity in their art, and that the species of eloquence,
which they aspire to, gives no exercise to the sublimer faculties of the mind, but may
be reached by ordinary talents and a slight application. A hundred cabinet-makers in
London can work a table or a chair equally well; but no one poet can write verses with
such spirit and elegance as Mr. Pope.
We are told, that, when Demosthenes was to plead, all ingenious men flocked to
Athens from the most remote parts of Greece, as to the most celebrated spectacle of
the world.3 At London you may see men sauntering in the court of requests, while the
most important debate is carrying on in the two houses;4 and many do not think
themselves sufficiently compensated, for the losing of their dinners, by all the
eloquence of our most celebrated speakers. When old Cibber is to act,5 the curiosity
of several is more excited, than when our prime minister is to defend himself from a
motion for his removal or impeachment.
Even a person, unacquainted with the noble remains of ancient orators, may judge,
from a few strokes, that the stile or species of their eloquence was infinitely more
sublime than that which modern orators aspire to. How absurd would it appear, in our
temperate and calm speakers, to make use of an Apostrophe, like that noble one of
Demosthenes, so much celebrated by Quintilian and Longinus, when justifying the
unsuccessful battle of Chæronea, he breaks out, No, my Fellow-Citizens, No: You
have not erred. I swear by the manes of those heroes, who fought for the same cause
in the plains ofMarathon and Platæa.6 Who could now endure such a bold and
poetical figure, as that which Cicero employs, after describing in the most tragical
terms the crucifixion of a Roman citizen. Should I paint the horrors of this scene, not
toRomancitizens, not to the allies of our state, not to those who have ever heard of
theRomanName, not even to men, but to brute-creatures; or, to go farther, should I
lift up my voice in the most desolate solitude, to the rocks and mountains, yet should I
surely see those rude and inanimate parts of nature moved with horror and
indignation at the recital of so enormous an action.7 With what a blaze of eloquence
must such a sentence be surrounded to give it grace, or cause it to make any
impression on the hearers? And what noble art and sublime talents are requisite to
arrive, by just degrees, at a sentiment so bold and excessive: To inflame the audience,
so as to make them accompany the speaker in such violent passions, and such
elevated conceptions: And to conceal, under a torrent of eloquence, the artifice, by
which all this is effectuated! Should this sentiment even appear to us excessive, as
perhaps it justly may, it will at least serve to give an idea of the stile of ancient
eloquence, where such swelling expressions were not rejected as wholly monstrous
and gigantic.c
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 73 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Suitable to this vehemence of thought and expression, was the vehemence of action,
observed in the ancient orators. The supplosio pedis, or stamping with the foot, was
one of the most usual and moderate gestures which they made use of;8 though that is
now esteemed too violent, either for the senate, bar, or pulpit, and is only admitted
into the theatre, to accompany the most violent passions, which are there represented.
One is somewhat at a loss to what cause we may ascribe so sensible a decline of
eloquence in later ages. The genius of mankind, at all times, is, perhaps, equal: The
moderns have applied themselves, with great industry and success, to all the other arts
and sciences: And a learned nation possesses a popular government; a circumstance
which seems requisite for the full display of these noble talents: But notwithstanding
all these advantages, our progress in eloquence is very inconsiderable, in comparison
of the advances, which we have made in all other parts of learning.
Shall we assert, that the strains of ancient eloquence are unsuitable to our age, and
ought not to be imitated by modern orators? Whatever reasons may be made use of to
prove this, I am persuaded they will be found, upon examination, to be unsound and
unsatisfactory.
First, It may be said, that, in ancient times, during the flourishing period of Greek and
Roman learning, the municipal laws, in every state, were but few and simple, and the
decision of causes, was, in a great measure, left to the equity and common sense of
the judges. The study of the laws was not then a laborious occupation, requiring the
drudgery of a whole life to finish it, and incompatible with every other study or
profession. The great statesmen and generals among the Romans were all lawyers;
and Cicero, to shew the facility of acquiring this science, declares, that, in the midst of
all his occupations, he would undertake, in a few days, to make himself a complete
civilian. Now, where a pleader addresses himself to the equity of his judges, he has
much more room to display his eloquence, than where he must draw his arguments
from strict laws, statutes, and precedents. In the former case, many circumstances
must be taken in; many personal considerations regarded; and even favour and
inclination, which it belongs to the orator, by his art and eloquence, to conciliate, may
be disguised under the appearance of equity. But how shall a modern lawyer have
leisure to quit his toilsome occupations, in order to gather the flowers of Parnassus?9
Or what opportunity shall he have of displaying them, amidst the rigid and subtile
arguments, objections, and replies, which he is obliged to make use of? The greatest
genius, and greatest orator, who should pretend to plead before the Chancellor,10
after a month’s study of the laws, would only labour to make himself ridiculous.
I am ready to own, that this circumstance, of the multiplicity and intricacy of laws, is
a discouragement to eloquence in modern times: But I assert, that it will not entirely
account for the decline of that noble art. It may banish oratory from WestminsterHall,11
but not from either house of parliament. Among the Athenians, the
Areopagites expressly forbad all allurements of eloquence;12 and some have
pretended that in the Greek orations, written in the judiciary form, there is not so bold
and rhetorical a stile, as appears in the Roman. But to what a pitch did the Athenians
carry their eloquence in the deliberative kind, when affairs of state were canvassed,°
and the liberty, happiness, and honour of the republic were the subject of debate?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 74 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Disputes of this nature elevate the genius above all others, and give the fullest scope
to eloquence; and such disputes are very frequent in this nation.
Secondly, It may be pretended that the decline of eloquence is owing to the superior
good sense of the moderns, who reject with disdain all those rhetorical tricks,
employed to seduce the judges, and will admit of nothing but solid argument in any
debate or deliberation. If a man be accused of murder, the fact must be proved by
witnesses and evidence; and the laws will afterwards determine the punishment of the
criminal. It would be ridiculous to describe, in strong colours, the horror and cruelty
of the action: To introduce the relations of the dead; and, at a signal, make them throw
themselves at the feet of the judges, imploring justice with tears and lamentations:
And still more ridiculous would it be, to employ a picture representing the bloody
deed, in order to move the judges by the display of so tragical a spectacle: Though we
know, that this artifice was sometimes practised by the pleaders of old.13 Now,
banish the pathetic° from public discourses, and you reduce the speakers merely to
modern eloquence; that is, to good sense, delivered in proper expression.
Perhaps it may be acknowledged, that our modern customs, or our superior good
sense, if you will, should make our orators more cautious and reserved than the
ancient, in attempting to inflame the passions, or elevate the imagination of their
audience: But, I see no reason, why it should make them despair absolutely of
succeeding in that attempt. It should make them redouble their art, not abandon it
entirely. The ancient orators seem also to have been on their guard against this
jealousy of their audience; but they took a different way of eluding it.14 They hurried
away with such a torrent of sublime° and pathetic, that they left their hearers no
leisure to perceive the artifice, by which they were deceived. Nay, to consider the
matter aright, they were not deceived by any artifice. The orator, by the force of his
own genius and eloquence, first inflamed himself with anger, indignation, pity,
sorrow; and then communicated those impetuous movements to his audience.
Does any man pretend to have more good sense than Julius Cæsar? yet that haughty
conqueror, we know, was so subdued by the charms of Cicero’s eloquence, that he
was, in a manner, constrained to change his settled purpose and resolution, and to
absolve a criminal, whom, before that orator pleaded, he was determined to
condemn.15
d Some objections, I own, notwithstanding his vast success, may lie against some
passages of the Roman orator. He is too florid and rhetorical: His figures are too
striking and palpable: The divisions of his discourse are drawn chiefly from the rules
of the schools: And his wit disdains not always the artifice even of a pun, rhyme, or
jingle of words. The Grecian addressed himself to an audience much less refined than
the Roman senate or judges. The lowest vulgar of Athens were his sovereigns, and the
arbiters of his eloquence.16 Yet is his manner more chaste° and austere than that of
the other. Could it be copied, its success would be infallible over a modern assembly.
It is rapid harmony, exactly adjusted to the sense: It is vehement reasoning, without
any appearance of art: It is disdain, anger, boldness, freedom, involved in a continued
stream of argument: And of all human productions, the orations of Demosthenes
present to us the models, which approach the nearest to perfection.d
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 75 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Thirdly, It may be pretended, that the disorders of the ancient governments, and the
enormous crimes, of which the citizens were often guilty, afforded much ampler
matter for eloquence than can be met with among the moderns. Were there no Verres
or Catiline, there would be no Cicero. But that this reason can have no great influence,
is evident. It would be easy to find a Philip in modern times;17 but where shall we
find a Demosthenes?
What remains, then, but that we lay the blame on the want of genius, or of judgment
in our speakers, who either found themselves incapable of reaching the heights of
ancient eloquence, or rejected all such endeavours, as unsuitable to the spirit of
modern assemblies? A few successful attempts of this nature might rouze the genius
of the nation, excite the emulation of the youth, and accustom our ears to a more
sublime and more pathetic elocution, than what we have been hitherto entertained
with. There is certainly something accidental in the first rise and the progress of the
arts in any nation. I doubt whether a very satisfactory reason can be given, why
ancient Rome, though it received all its refinements from Greece, could attain only to
a relish for statuary, painting and architecture, without reaching the practice of these
arts: While modern Rome has been excited, by a few remains found among the ruins
of antiquity, and has produced artists of the greatest eminence and distinction. Had
such a cultivated genius for oratory, as Waller’se for poetry,18 arisen, during the civil
wars, when liberty began to be fully established, and popular assemblies to enter into
all the most material points of government; I am persuaded so illustrious an example
would have given a quite different turn to British eloquence, and made us reach the
perfection of the ancient model. Our orators would then have done honour to their
country, as well as our poets, geometers, and philosophers, and British Ciceros have
appeared, as well as British Archimedesesf and Virgils.19,
g
It is seldom or never found, when a false taste in poetry or eloquence prevails among
any people, that it has been preferred to a true, upon comparison and reflection. It
commonly prevails merely from ignorance of the true, and from the want of perfect
models, to lead men into a juster apprehension, and more refined relish of those
productions of genius. When these appear, they soon unite all suffrages in their
favour, and, by their natural and powerful charms, gain over, even the most
prejudiced, to the love and admiration of them. The principles of every passion, and
of every sentiment, is in every man; and when touched properly, they rise to life, and
warm the heart, and convey that satisfaction, by which a work of genius is
distinguished from the adulterate° beauties of a capricious wit and fancy. And if this
observation be true, with regard to all the liberal arts, it must be peculiarly so, with
regard to eloquence; which, being merely calculated for the public, and for men of the
world, cannot, with any pretence of reason, appeal from the people to more refined
judges; but must submit to the public verdict, without reserve or limitation. Whoever,
upon comparison, is deemed by a common audience the greatest orator, ought most
certainly to be pronounced such, by men of science and erudition. And though an
indifferent speaker may triumph for a long time, and be esteemed altogether perfect
by the vulgar, who are satisfied with his accomplishments, and know not in what he is
defective: Yet, whenever the true genius arises, he draws to him the attention of every
one, and immediately appears superior to his rival.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 76 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Now to judge by this rule, ancient eloquence, that is, the sublime and passionate, is of
a much juster taste than the modern, or the argumentative and rational; and, if
properly executed, will always have more command and authority over mankind. We
are satisfied with our mediocrity, because we have had no experience of any thing
better: But the ancients had experience of both, and, upon comparison, gave the
preference to that kind, of which they have left us such applauded models. For, if I
mistake not, our modern eloquence is of the same stile or species with that which
ancient critics denominated Attic eloquence, that is, calm, elegant, and subtile, which
instructed the reason more than affected the passions, and never raised its tone above
argument or common discourse. Such was the eloquence of Lysias among the
Athenians, and of Calvus among the Romans.20 These were esteemed in their time;
but when compared with Demosthenes and Cicero, were eclipsed like a taper° when
set in the rays of a meridian sun.° Those latter orators possessed the same elegance,
and subtilty, and force of argument, with the former; but what rendered them chiefly
admirable, was that pathetic and sublime, which, on proper occasions, they threw into
their discourse, and by which they commanded the resolution° of their audience.
Of this species of eloquence we have scarcely had any instance in England, at least in
our public speakers. In our writers, we have had some instances, which have met with
great applause, and might assure our ambitious youth of equal or superior glory in
attempts for the revival of ancient eloquence. Lord Bolingbroke’s productions, with
all their defects in argument, method, and precision,h contain a force and energy
which our orators scarcely ever aim at; though it is evident, that such an elevated stile
has much better grace in a speaker than in a writer, and is assured of more prompt and
more astonishing success. It is there seconded by the graces of voice and action: The
movements are mutually communicated between the orator and the audience: And the
very aspect of a large assembly, attentive to the discourse of one man, must inspire
him with a peculiar elevation, sufficient to give a propriety to° the strongest figures
and expressions. It is true, there is a great prejudice against set speeches; and a man
cannot escape ridicule, who repeats a discourse as a school-boy does his lesson, and
takes no notice of any thing that has been advanced in the course of the debate. But
where is the necessity of falling into this absurdity? A public speaker must know
beforehand the question under debate. He may compose all the arguments, objections,
and answers, such as he thinks will be most proper for his discourse.21 If any thing
new occur, he may supply it from his invention; nor will the difference be very
apparent between his elaborate and his extemporary compositions. The mind naturally
continues with the same impetus or force, which it has acquired by its motion; as a
vessel, once impelled by the oars, carries on its course for some time, when the
original impulse is suspended.
I shall conclude this subject with observing, that, even though our modern orators
should not elevate their stile or aspire to a rivalship with the ancient; yet is there, in
most of their speeches, a material defect, which they might correct, without departing
from that composed air of argument and reasoning, to which they limit their ambition.
Their great affectation of extemporary discourses has made them reject all order and
method, which seems so requisite to argument, and without which it is scarcely
possible to produce an entire conviction on the mind. It is not, that one would
recommend many divisions in a public discourse, unless the subject very evidently
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 77 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
offer them: But it is easy, without this formality, to observe a method, and make that
method conspicuous to the hearers, who will be infinitely pleased to see the
arguments rise naturally from one another, and will retain a more thorough
persuasion, than can arise from the strongest reasons, which are thrown together in
confusion.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 78 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XIV
OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE ARTS AND
SCIENCES
Nothing requires greater nicety,° in our enquiries concerning human affairs, than to
distinguish exactly what is owing to chance, and what proceeds from causes; nor is
there any subject, in which an author is more liable to deceive himself by false
subtilties and refinements. To say, that any event is derived from chance, cuts short all
farther enquiry concerning it, and leaves the writer in the same state of ignorance with
the rest of mankind. But when the event is supposed to proceed from certain and
stable causes, he may then display his ingenuity, in assigning these causes; and as a
man of any subtilty can never be at a loss in this particular, he has thereby an
opportunity of swelling his volumes, and discovering his profound knowledge, in
observing what escapes the vulgar and ignorant.
The distinguishing between chance and causes must depend upon every particular
man’s sagacity, in considering every particular incident. But, if I were to assign any
general rule to help us in applying this distinction, it would be the following, What
depends upon a few persons is, in a great measure, to be ascribed to chance, or secret
and unknown causes: What arises from a great number, may often be accounted for
by determinate and known causes.
Two natural reasons may be assigned for this rule. First, If you suppose a dye to have
any biass, however small, to a particular side, this biass, though, perhaps, it may not
appear in a few throws, will certainly prevail in a great number, and will cast the
balance entirely to that side. In like manner, when any causes beget a particular
inclination or passion, at a certain time, and among a certain people; though many
individuals may escape the contagion, and be ruled by passions peculiar to
themselves; yet the multitude will certainly be seized by the common affection, and
be governed by it in all their actions.
Secondly, Those principles or causes, which are fitted to operate on a multitude, are
always of a grosser and more stubborn nature, less subject to accidents, and less
influenced by whim and private fancy, than those which operate on a few only. The
latter are commonly so delicate and refined, that the smallest incident in the health,
education, or fortune of a particular person, is sufficient to divert their course, and
retard their operation; nor is it possible to reduce them to any general maxims or
observations. Their influence at one time will never assure us concerning their
influence at another; even though all the general circumstances should be the same in
both cases.
To judge by this rule, the domestic and the gradual revolutions of a state must be a
more proper subject of reasoning and observation, than the foreign and the violent,
which are commonly produced by single persons, and are more influenced by whim,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 79 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
folly, or caprice, than by general passions and interests. The depression of the lords,
and rise of the commons in England, after the statutes of alienation and the encrease
of trade and industry, are more easily accounted for by general principles, than the
depression of the Spanish, and rise of the French monarchy, after the death of Charles
Quint.1 Had Harry IV. Cardinal Richlieu, and Louis XIV. been Spaniards; and Philip
II. III. and IV. and Charles II. been Frenchmen, the history of these two nations had
been entirely reversed.2
For the same reason, it is more easy to account for the rise and progress of commerce
in any kingdom, than for that of learning; and a state, which should apply itself to the
encouragement of the one, would be more assured of success, than one which should
cultivate the other. Avarice, or the desire of gain, is an universal passion, which
operates at all times, in all places, and upon all persons: But curiosity, or the love of
knowledge, has a very limited influence, and requires youth, leisure, education,
genius, and example, to make it govern any person. You will never want booksellers,
while there are buyers of books: But there may frequently be readers where there are
no authors. Multitudes of people, necessity and liberty, have begotten commerce in
Holland: But study and application have scarcely produced any eminent writers.
We may, therefore, conclude, that there is no subject, in which we must proceed with
more caution, than in tracing the history of the arts and sciences; lest we assign causes
which never existed, and reduce what is merely contingent to stable and universal
principles. Those who cultivate the sciences in any state, are always few in number:
The passion, which governs them, limited: Their taste and judgment delicate and
easily perverted: And their application disturbed with the smallest accident. Chance,
therefore, or secret and unknown causes, must have a great influence on the rise and
progress of all the refined arts.
But there is a reason, which induces me not to ascribe the matter altogether to chance.
Though the persons, who cultivate the sciences with such astonishing success, as to
attract the admiration of posterity, be always few, in all nations and all ages; it is
impossible but a share of the same spirit and genius must be antecedently diffused
throughout the people among whom they arise, in order to produce, form, and
cultivate, from their earliest infancy, the taste and judgment of those eminent writers.
The mass cannot be altogether insipid, from which such refined spirits are extracted.
There is a God within us, says Ovid, who breathes that divine fire, by which we are
animated.3 Poets, in all ages, have advanced this claim to inspiration. There is not,
however, any thing supernatural in the case. Their fire is not kindled from heaven. It
only runs along the earth; is caught from one breast to another; and burns brightest,
where the materials are best prepared, and most happily disposed. The question,
therefore, concerning the rise and progress of the arts and sciences, is not altogether a
question concerning the taste, genius, and spirit of a few, but concerning those of a
whole people; and may, therefore, be accounted for, in some measure, by general
causes and principles. I grant, that a man, who should enquire, why such a particular
poet, as Homer,4 for instance, existed, at such a place, in such a time, would throw
himself headlong into chimæra,° and could never treat of such a subject, without a
multitude of false subtilties and refinements. He might as well pretend to give a
reason, why such particular generals, as Fabius and Scipio, lived in Rome at such a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 80 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
time, and why Fabius came into the world before Scipio.5 For such incidents as these,
no other reason can be given than that of Horace:
Scit genius, natale comes, qui temperat astrum,
Naturæ Deus humanæ, mortalis in unum—
—Quodque caput, vultu mutabilis, albus & ater.6
But I am persuaded, that in many cases good reasons might be given, why such a
nation is more polite and learned, at a particular time, than any of its neighbours. At
least, this is so curious a subject, that it were a pity to abandon it entirely, before we
have found whether it be susceptible of reasoning, and can be reduced to any general
principles.a
My first observation on this head is, That it is impossible for the arts and sciences to
arise, at first, among any people unless that people enjoy the blessing of a free
government.
In the first ages of the world, when men are as yet barbarous and ignorant, they seek
no farther security against mutual violence and injustice, than the choice of some
rulers, few or many, in whom they place an implicit confidence, without providing
any security, by laws or political institutions, against the violence and injustice of
these rulers. If the authority be centered in a single person, and if the people, either by
conquest, or by the ordinary course of propagation, encrease to a great multitude, the
monarch, finding it impossible, in his own person, to execute every office of
sovereignty, in every place, must delegate his authority to inferior magistrates, who
preserve peace and order in their respective districts. As experience and education
have not yet refined the judgments of men to any considerable degree, the prince, who
is himself unrestrained, never dreams of restraining his ministers, but delegates his
full authority to every one, whom he sets over any portion of the people. All general
laws are attended with inconveniencies, when applied to particular cases; and it
requires great penetration and experience, both to perceive that these inconveniencies
are fewer than what result from full discretionary powers in every magistrate; and also
to discern what general laws are, upon the whole, attended with fewest
inconveniencies. This is a matter of so great difficulty, that men may have made some
advances, even in the sublime arts of poetry and eloquence, where a rapidity of genius
and imagination assists their progress, before they have arrived at any great
refinement in their municipal laws, where frequent trials and diligent observation can
alone direct their improvements. It is not, therefore, to be supposed, that a barbarous
monarch, unrestrained and uninstructed, will ever become a legislator, or think of
restraining his Bashaws,° in every province, or even his Cadis° in every village. We
are told, that the late Czar,7 though actuated with a noble genius, and smit with the
love and admiration of European arts; yet professed an esteem for the Turkish policy
in this particular, and approved of such summary decisions of causes, as are practised
in that barbarous monarchy, where the judges are not restrained by any methods,
forms, or laws. He did not perceive, how contrary such a practice would have been to
all his other endeavours for refining his people. Arbitrary power, in all cases, is
somewhat oppressive and debasing; but it is altogether ruinous and intolerable, when
contracted into a small compass; and becomes still worse, when the person, who
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 81 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
possesses it, knows that the time of his authority is limited and uncertain. Habet
subjectos tanquam suos; viles, ut alienos.8 He governs the subjects with full
authority, as if they were his own; and with negligence or tyranny, as belonging to
another. A people, governed after such a manner, are slaves in the full and proper
sense of the word; and it is impossible they can ever aspire to any refinements of taste
or reason. They dare not so much as pretend to enjoy the necessaries of life in plenty
or security.
To expect, therefore, that the arts and sciences should take their first rise in a
monarchy, is to expect a contradiction. Before these refinements have taken place, the
monarch is ignorant and uninstructed; and not having knowledge sufficient to make
him sensible of the necessity of balancing his government upon general laws, he
delegates his full power to all inferior magistrates. This barbarous policy debases the
people, and for ever prevents all improvements. Were it possible, that, before science
were known in the world, a monarch could possess so much wisdom as to become a
legislator, and govern his people by law, not by the arbitrary will of their fellowsubjects,
it might be possible for that species of government to be the first nursery of
arts and sciences. But that supposition seems scarcely to be consistent or rational.
It may happen, that a republic, in its infant state, may be supported by as few laws as
a barbarous monarchy, and may entrust as unlimited an authority to its magistrates or
judges. But, besides that the frequent elections by the people, are a considerable check
upon authority; it is impossible, but, in time, the necessity of restraining the
magistrates, in order to preserve liberty, must at last appear, and give rise to general
laws and statutes. The Roman Consuls, for some time, decided all causes, without
being confined by any positive statutes, till the people, bearing this yoke with
impatience, created the decemvirs, who promulgated the twelve tables; a body of
laws, which, though, perhaps, they were not equal in bulk to one English act of
parliament, were almost the only written rules, which regulated property and
punishment, for some ages, in that famous republic. They were, however, sufficient,
together with the forms of a free government, to secure the lives and properties of the
citizens, to exempt one man from the dominion of another; and to protect every one
against the violence or tyranny of his fellow-citizens. In such a situation the sciences
may raise their heads and flourish: But never can have being amidst such a scene of
oppression and slavery, as always results from barbarous monarchies, where the
people alone are restrained by the authority of the magistrates, and the magistrates are
not restrained by any law or statute. An unlimited despotism of this nature, while it
exists, effectually puts a stop to all improvements, and keeps men from attaining that
knowledge, which is requisite to instruct them in the advantages, arising from a better
police, and more moderate authority.
Here then are the advantages of free states. Though a republic should be barbarous, it
necessarily, by an infallible operation, gives rise to Law, even before mankind have
made any considerable advances in the other sciences. From law arises security: From
security curiosity: And from curiosity knowledge. The latter steps of this progress
may be more accidental; but the former are altogether necessary. A republic without
laws can never have any duration. On the contrary, in a monarchical government, law
arises not necessarily from the forms of government. Monarchy, when absolute,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 82 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
contains even something repugnant to law. Great wisdom and reflexion can alone
reconcile them. But such a degree of wisdom can never be expected, before the
greater refinements and improvements of human reason. These refinements require
curiosity, security, and law. The first growth, therefore, of the arts and sciences can
never be expected in despotic governments.b
There are other causes, which discourage the rise of the refined arts in despotic
governments; though I take the want of laws, and the delegation of full powers to
every petty magistrate, to be the principal. Eloquence certainly springs up more
naturally in popular governments: Emulation too in every accomplishment must there
be more animated and enlivened: And genius and capacity have a fuller scope and
career. All these causes render free governments the only proper nursery for the arts
and sciences.
The next observation, which I shall make on this head, is, That nothing is more
favourable to the rise of politeness and learning, than a number of neighbouring and
independent states, connected together by commerce and policy. The emulation,
which naturally arises among those neighbouring states, is an obvious source of
improvement: But what I would chiefly insist on is the stop,° which such limited
territories give both to power and to authority.
Extended governments, where a single person has great influence, soon become
absolute; but small ones change naturally into commonwealths. A large government is
accustomed by degrees to tyranny; because each act of violence is at first performed
upon a part, which, being distant from the majority, is not taken notice of, nor excites
any violent ferment. Besides, a large government, though the whole be discontented,
may, by a little art, be kept in obedience; while each part, ignorant of the resolutions
of the rest, is afraid to begin any commotion or insurrection. Not to mention, that
there is a superstitious reverence for princes, which mankind naturally contract when
they do not often see the sovereign, and when many of them become not acquainted
with him so as to perceive his weaknesses. And as large states can afford a great
expence, in order to support the pomp of majesty; this is a kind of fascination on men,
and naturally contributes to the enslaving of them.
In a small government, any act of oppression is immediately known throughout the
whole: The murmurs and discontents, proceeding from it, are easily communicated:
And the indignation arises the higher, because the subjects are not apt to apprehend in
such states, that the distance is very wide between themselves and their sovereign.
“No man,” said the prince of Conde, “is a hero to his Valet de Chambre.”9 It is certain
that admiration and acquaintance are altogether incompatible towards any mortal
creature.c Sleep and love convinced even Alexander himself that he was not a God:
But I suppose that such as daily attended him could easily, from the numberless
weaknesses to which he was subject, have given him many still more convincing
proofs of his humanity.
But the divisions into small states are favourable to learning, by stopping the progress
of authority as well as that of power. Reputation is often as great a fascination upon
men as sovereignty, and is equally destructive to the freedom of thought and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 83 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
examination. But where a number of neighbouring states have a great intercourse of
arts and commerce, their mutual jealousy keeps them from receiving too lightly the
law from each other, in matters of taste and of reasoning, and makes them examine
every work of art with the greatest care and accuracy. The contagion of popular
opinion spreads not so easily from one place to another. It readily receives a check in
some state or other, where it concurs not with the prevailing prejudices. And nothing
but nature and reason, or, at least, what bears them a strong resemblance,d can force
its way through all obstacles, and unite the most rival nations into an esteem and
admiration of it.
Greece was a cluster of little principalities, which soon became republics; and being
united both by their near neighbourhood, and by the ties of the same language and
interest, they entered into the closest intercourse of commerce and learning. There
concurred a happy climate, a soil not unfertile, and a most harmonious and
comprehensive language; so that every circumstance among that people seemed to
favour the rise of the arts and sciences. Each city produced its several artists and
philosophers, who refused to yield the preference to those of the neighbouring
republics: Their contention and debates sharpened the wits of men: A variety of
objects was presented to the judgment, while each challenged the preference to the
rest: and the sciences, not being dwarfed by the restraint of authority, were enabled to
make such considerable shoots, as are, even at this time, the objects of our admiration.
After the Romanchristian, or catholic church had spread itself over the civilized
world, and had engrossed all the learning of the times; being really one large state
within itself, and united under one head; this variety of sects immediately
disappeared, and the Peripatetic philosophy was alone admitted into all the schools,10
to the utter depravation of every kind of learning. But mankind, having at length
thrown off this yoke, affairs are now returned nearly to the same situation as before,
and Europe is at present a copy at large, of what Greece was formerly a pattern in
miniature. We have seen the advantage of this situation in several instances. What
checked the progress of the Cartesian philosophy,11 to which the French nation
shewed such a strong propensity towards the end of the last century, but the
opposition made to it by the other nations of Europe, who soon discovered the weak
sides of that philosophy? The severest scrutiny, which Newton’s theory has
undergone,12 proceeded not from his own countrymen, but from foreigners; and if it
can overcome the obstacles, which it meets with at present in all parts of Europe, it
will probably go down triumphant to the latest posterity. The English are become
sensible of the scandalous licentiousness of their stage, from the example of the
French decency and morals. The French are convinced, that their theatre has become
somewhat effeminate, by too much love and gallantry; and begin to approve of the
more masculine taste of some neighbouring nations.
In China, there seems to be a pretty considerable stock of politeness and science,
which, in the course of so many centuries, might naturally be expected to ripen into
something more perfect and finished, than what has yet arisen from them. But China
is one vast empire, speaking one language, governed by one law, and sympathizing in
the same manners. The authority of any teacher, such as Confucius, was propagated
easily from one corner of the empire to the other. None had courage to resist the
torrent of popular opinion. And posterity was not bold enough to dispute what had
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 84 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
been universally received by their ancestors. This seems to be one natural reason, why
the sciences have made so slow a progress in that mighty empire.13
If we consider the face of the globe, Europe, of all the four parts of the world, is the
most broken by seas, rivers, and mountains; and Greece of all countries of Europe.
Hence these regions were naturally divided into several distinct governments. And
hence the sciences arose in Greece; and Europe has been hitherto the most constant
habitation of them.
I have sometimes been inclined to think, that interruptions in the periods of learning,
were they not attended with such a destruction of ancient books, and the records of
history, would be rather favourable to the arts and sciences, by breaking the progress
of authority, and dethroning the tyrannical usurpers over human reason. In this
particular, they have the same influence, as interruptions in political governments and
societies. Consider the blind submission of the ancient philosophers to the several
masters in each school, and you will be convinced, that little good could be expected
from a hundred centuries of such a servile philosophy. Even the Eclectics,14 who
arose about the age of Augustus, notwithstanding their professing to chuse freely what
pleased them from every different sect, were yet, in the main, as slavish and
dependent as any of their brethren; since they sought for truth not in nature, but in the
several schools; where they supposed she must necessarily be found, though not
united in a body, yet dispersed in parts. Upon the revival of learning, those sects of
Stoics and Epicureans, Platonists and Pythagoricians,15 could never regain any credit
or authority; and, at the same time, by the example of their fall, kept men from
submitting, with such blind deference, to those new sects, which have attempted to
gain an ascendant over them.
The third observation, which I shall form on this head, of the rise and progress of the
arts and sciences, is, That though the only proper Nursery of these noble plants be a
free state; yet may they be transplanted into any government; and that a republic is
most favourable to the growth of the sciences, a civilized monarchy to that of the
polite arts.
To balance a large state or society, whether monarchical or republican, on general
laws, is a work of so great difficulty, that no human genius, however comprehensive,
is able, by the mere dint of reason and reflection, to effect it. The judgments of many
must unite in this work: Experience must guide their labour: Time must bring it to
perfection: And the feeling of inconveniencies must correct the mistakes, which they
inevitably fall into, in their first trials and experiments. Hence appears the
impossibility, that this undertaking should be begun and carried on in any monarchy;
since such a form of government, ere° civilized, knows no other secret or policy, than
that of entrusting unlimited powers to every governor or magistrate, and subdividing
the people into so many classes and orders of slavery. From such a situation, no
improvement can ever be expected in the sciences, in the liberal arts, in laws, and
scarcely in the manual arts and manufactures. The same barbarism and ignorance,
with which the government commences, is propagated to all posterity, and can never
come to a period by the efforts or ingenuity of such unhappy slaves.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 85 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
But though law, the source of all security and happiness, arises late in any
government, and is the slow product of order and of liberty, it is not preserved with
the same difficulty, with which it is produced; but when it has once taken root, is a
hardy plant, which will scarcely ever perish through the ill culture of men, or the
rigour of the seasons. The arts of luxury, and much more the liberal arts, which
depend on a refined taste or sentiment, are easily lost; because they are always
relished by a few only, whose leisure, fortune, and genius fit them for such
amusements. But what is profitable to every mortal, and in common life, when once
discovered, can scarcely fall into oblivion, but by the total subversion of society, and
by such furious inundations of barbarous invaders, as obliterate all memory of former
arts and civility. Imitation also is apt to transport these coarser and more useful arts
from one climate to another, and make them precede the refined arts in their progress;
though perhaps they sprang after them in their first rise and propagation. From these
causes proceed civilized monarchies; where the arts of government, first invented in
free states, are preserved to the mutual advantage and security of sovereign and
subject.
However perfect, therefore, the monarchical form may appear to some politicians, it
owes all its perfection to the republican; nor is it possible, that a pure despotism,
established among a barbarous people, can ever, by its native force and energy, refine
and polish itself. It must borrow its laws, and methods, and institutions, and
consequently its stability and order, from free governments. These advantages are the
sole growth of republics. The extensive despotism of a barbarous monarchy, by
entering into the detail of the government, as well as into the principal points of
administration, for ever prevents all such improvements.
In a civilized monarchy, the prince alone is unrestrained in the exercise of his
authority, and possesses alone a power, which is not bounded by any thing but
custom, example, and the sense of his own interest. Every minister or magistrate,
however eminent, must submit to the general laws, which govern the whole society,
and must exert the authority delegated to him after the manner, which is prescribed.
The people depend on none but their sovereign, for the security of their property. He
is so far removed from them, and is so much exempt from private jealousies or
interests, that this dependence is scarcely felt. And thus a species of government
arises, to which, in a high political rant,° we may give the name of Tyranny, but
which, by a just and prudent administration, may afford tolerable security to the
people, and may answer most of the ends of political society.
But though in a civilized monarchy, as well as in a republic, the people have security
for the enjoyment of their property; yet in both these forms of government, those who
possess the supreme authority have the disposal of many honours and advantages,
which excite the ambition and avarice of mankind. The only difference is, that, in a
republic, the candidates for office must look downwards, to gain the suffrages of the
people; in a monarchy, they must turn their attention upwards, to court the good
graces and favour of the great. To be successful in the former way, it is necessary for
a man to make himself useful, by his industry, capacity, or knowledge: To be
prosperous in the latter way, it is requisite for him to render himself agreeable, by his
wit, complaisance, or civility. A strong genius succeeds best in republics: A refined
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 86 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
taste in monarchies. And consequently the sciences are the more natural growth of the
one, and the polite arts of the other.
Not to mention, that monarchies, receiving their chief stability from a superstitious
reverence to priests and princes, have commonly abridged the liberty of reasoning,
with regard to religion, and politics, and consequently metaphysics and morals. All
these form the most considerable branches of science. Mathematics and natural
philosophy, which only remain, are not half so valuable.e
Among the arts of conversation, no one pleases more than mutual deference or
civility, which leads us to resign our own inclinations to those of our companion, and
to curb and conceal that presumption and arrogance, so natural to the human mind. A
good-natured man, who is well educated, practises this civility to every mortal,
without premeditation or interest. But in order to render that valuable quality general
among any people, it seems necessary to assist the natural disposition by some general
motive. Where power rises upwards from the people to the great, as in all republics,
such refinements of civility are apt to be little practised; since the whole state is, by
that means, brought near to a level, and every member of it is rendered, in a great
measure, independent of another. The people have the advantage, by the authority of
their suffrages: The great, by the superiority of their station. But in a civilized
monarchy, there is a long train of dependence from the prince to the peasant, which is
not great enough to render property precarious, or depress the minds of the people;
but is sufficient to beget in every one an inclination to please his superiors, and to
form himself upon those models, which are most acceptable to people of condition
and education. Politeness of manners, therefore, arises most naturally in monarchies
and courts; and where that flourishes, none of the liberal arts will be altogether
neglected or despised.
The republics in Europe are at present noted for want of politeness. The goodmanners
of aSwisscivilized inHolland,16 is an expression for rusticity among the
French. The English, in some degree, fall under the same censure, notwithstanding
their learning and genius. And if the Venetians be an exception to the rule, they owe
it, perhaps, to their communication with the other Italians, most of whose
governments beget a dependence more than sufficient for civilizing their manners.
It is difficult to pronounce any judgment concerning the refinements of the ancient
republics in this particular: But I am apt to suspect, that the arts of conversation were
not brought so near to perfection among them as the arts of writing and composition.
The scurrility of the ancient orators, in many instances, is quite shocking, and exceeds
all belief. Vanity too is often not a little offensive in authors of those ages;17 as well
as the common licentiousness and immodesty of their stile, Quicunque impudicus,
adulter, ganeo, manu, ventre, pene, bona patria laceraverat, says Sallust in one of the
gravest and most moral passages of his history.18Nam fuit ante Helenam Cunnus
teterrima belli Causa, is an expression of Horace, in tracing the origin of moral good
and evil.19Ovid and Lucretius20 are almost as licentious in their stile as Lord
Rochester;21 though the former were fine gentlemen and delicate writers, and the
latter,g from the corruptions of that court, in which he lived, seems to have thrown off
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 87 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
all regard to shame and decency. Juvenal22 inculcates modesty with great zeal; but
sets a very bad example of it, if we consider the impudence of his expressions.
I shall also be bold to affirm, that among the ancients, there was not much delicacy of
breeding, or that polite deference and respect, which civility obliges us either to
express or counterfeit towards the persons with whom we converse. Cicero was
certainly one of the finest gentlemen of his age; yet I must confess I have frequently
been shocked with the poor figure under which he represents his friend Atticus, in
those dialogues, where he himself is introduced as a speaker. That learned and
virtuous Roman, whose dignity, though he was only a private gentleman, was inferior
to that of no one in Rome, is there shewn in rather a more pitiful light than
Philalethes’s friend in our modern dialogues. He is a humble admirer of the orator,
pays him frequent compliments, and receives his instructions, with all the deference
which a scholar owes to his master.23 Even Cato is treated in somewhat of a cavalier
manner in the dialogues de finibus.24,
h
One of the most particular details of a real dialogue, which we meet with in antiquity,
is related by Polybius;25 when Philip, king of Macedon, a prince of wit and parts, met
with Titus Flamininus, one of the politest of the Romans, as we learn from
Plutarch,26 accompanied with ambassadors from almost all the Greek cities. The
Ætolian ambassador very abruptly tells the king, that he talked like a fool or a
madman (ληρει?ν). That’s evident, says his majesty, even to a blind man; which was a
raillery on the blindness of his excellency. Yet all this did not pass the usual bounds:
For the conference was not disturbed; and Flamininus was very well diverted with
these strokes of humour. At the end, when Philip craved a little time to consult with
his friends, of whom he had none present, the Roman general, being desirous also to
shew his wit, as the historian says, tells him, that perhaps the reason, why he had
none of his friends with him, was because he had murdered them all; which was
actually the case. This unprovoked piece of rusticity is not condemned by the
historian; caused no farther resentment in Philip, than to excite a Sardonian smile, or
what we call a grin; and hindered him not from renewing the conference next day.
Plutarch27 too mentions this raillery amongst the witty and agreeable sayings of
Flamininus.i
,
j
Cardinal Wolsey28 apologized for his famous piece of insolence, in saying, Ego et
Rex meus, I and my king, by observing, that this expression was conformable to the
Latin idiom, and that a Roman always named himself before the person to whom, or
of whom he spake. Yet this seems to have been an instance of want of civility among
that people. The ancients made it a rule, that the person of the greatest dignity should
be mentioned first in the discourse; insomuch, that we find the spring of a quarrel and
jealousy between the Romans and Ætolians, to have been a poet’s naming the
Ætolians before the Romans, in celebrating a victory gained by their united arms over
the Macedonians.29 Thus Livia disgusted Tiberius by placing her own name before
his in an inscription.30,
k
No advantages in this world are pure and unmixed. In like manner, as modern
politeness, which is naturally so ornamental, runs often into affectation and foppery,°
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 88 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
disguise and insincerity; so the ancient simplicity, which is naturally so amiable and
affecting, often degenerates into rusticity and abuse, scurrility and obscenity.
If the superiority in politeness should be allowed to modern times, the modern notions
of gallantry, the natural produce of courts and monarchies, will probably be assigned
as the causes of this refinement. No one denies this invention to be modern:31 But
some of the more zealous partizans of the ancients, have asserted it to be foppish and
ridiculous, and a reproach, rather than a credit, to the present age.32 It may here be
proper to examine this question.
Nature has implanted in all living creatures an affection between the sexes, which,
even in the fiercest and most rapacious animals, is not merely confined to the
satisfaction of the bodily appetite, but begets a friendship and mutual sympathy,
which runs through the whole tenor of their lives. Nay, even in those species, where
nature limits the indulgence of this appetite to one season and to one object, and forms
a kind of marriage or association between a single male and female, there is yet a
visible complacency and benevolence, which extends farther, and mutually softens the
affections of the sexes towards each other.l How much more must this have place in
man, where the confinement of the appetite is not natural; but either is derived
accidentally from some strong charm of love, or arises from reflections on duty and
convenience? Nothing, therefore, can proceed less from affectation than the passion
of gallantry. It is natural in the highest degree. Art and education, in the most elegant
courts, make no more alteration on it, than on all the other laudable passions. They
only turn the mind more towards it; they refine it; they polish it; and give it a proper
grace and expression.
But gallantry is as generous as it is natural. To correct such gross vices, as lead us to
commit real injury on others, is the part of morals, and the object of the most ordinary
education. Where that is not attended to, in some degree, no human society can
subsist. But in order to render conversation, and the intercourse of minds more easy
and agreeable, good-manners have been invented, and have carried the matter
somewhat farther. Wherever nature has given the mind a propensity to any vice, or to
any passion disagreeable to others, refined breeding has taught men to throw the biass
on the opposite side, and to preserve, in all their behaviour, the appearance of
sentiments different from those to which they naturally incline. Thus, as we are
commonly proud and selfish, and apt to assume the preference above others, a polite
man learns to behave with deference towards his companions, and to yield the
superiority to them in all the common incidents of society. In like manner, wherever a
person’s situation may naturally beget any disagreeable suspicion in him, it is the part
of good-manners to prevent it, by a studied display of sentiments, directly contrary to
those of which he is apt to be jealous. Thus, old men know their infirmities, and
naturally dread contempt from the youth: Hence, well-educated youth redouble the
instances of respect and deference to their elders. Strangers and foreigners are without
protection: Hence, in all polite countries, they receive the highest civilities, and are
entitled to the first place in every company. A man is lord in his own family, and his
guests are, in a manner, subject to his authority: Hence, he is always the lowest person
in the company; attentive to the wants of every one; and giving himself all the trouble,
in order to please, which may not betray too visible an affectation, or impose too
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 89 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
much constraint on his guests.33 Gallantry is nothing but an instance of the same
generous attention. As nature has given man the superiority above woman, by
endowing him with greater strength both of mind and body; it is his part to alleviate
that superiority, as much as possible, by the generosity of his behaviour, and by a
studied deference and complaisance for all her inclinations and opinions. Barbarous
nations display this superiority, by reducing their females to the most abject slavery;
by confining them, by beating them, by selling them, by killing them. But the male
sex, among a polite people, discover their authority in a more generous, though not a
less evident manner; by civility, by respect, by complaisance, and, in a word, by
gallantry. In good company, you need not ask, Who is the master of the feast? The
man, who sits in the lowest place, and who is always industrious in helping every one,
is certainly the person. We must either condemn all such instances of generosity, as
foppish and affected, or admit of gallantry among the rest. The ancient Muscovites°
wedded their wives with a whip, instead of a ring. The same people, in their own
houses, took always the precedency above foreigners, even34 foreign ambassadors.
These two instances of their generosity and politeness are much of a piece.
Gallantry is not less compatible with wisdom and prudence, than with nature and
generosity; and when under proper regulations, contributes more than any other
invention, to the entertainment and improvement of the youth of both sexes.m Among
every species of animals, nature has founded on the love between the sexes their
sweetest and best enjoyment. But the satisfaction of the bodily appetite is not alone
sufficient to gratify the mind; and even among brute-creatures, we find, that their play
and dalliance, and other expressions of fondness, form the greatest part of the
entertainment. In rational beings, we must certainly admit the mind for a considerable
share. Were we to rob the feast of all its garniture° of reason, discourse, sympathy,
friendship, and gaiety, what remains would scarcely be worth acceptance, in the
judgment of the truly elegant and luxurious.
What better school for manners, than the company of virtuous women; where the
mutual endeavour to please must insensibly polish the mind, where the example of the
female softness and modesty must communicate itself to their admirers, and where the
delicacy of that sex puts every one on his guard, lest he give offence by any breach of
decency?n
Among the ancients, the character of the fair-sex was considered as altogether
domestic; nor were they regarded as part of the polite world or of good company.
This, perhaps, is the true reason why the ancients have not left us one piece of
pleasantry that is excellent, (unless one may except the Banquet of Xenophon, and the
Dialogues of Lucian35 ) though many of their serious compositions are altogether
inimitable. Horace condemns the coarse railleries and cold jests of Plautus:36 But,
though the most easy, agreeable, and judicious writer in the world, is his own talent
for ridicule very striking or refined? This, therefore, is one considerable improvement,
which the polite arts have received from gallantry, and from courts, where it first
arose.o
But, to return from this digression, I shall advance it as a fourth observation on this
subject, of the rise and progress of the arts and sciences, That when the arts and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 90 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
sciences come to perfection in any state, from that moment they naturally, or rather
necessarily decline, and seldom or never revive in that nation, where they formerly
flourished.
It must be confessed, that this maxim, though conformable to experience, may, at first
sight, be esteemed contrary to reason. If the natural genius of mankind be the same in
all ages, and in almost all countries, (as seems to be the truth) it must very much
forward and cultivate this genius, to be possessed of patterns in every art, which may
regulate the taste, and fix the objects of imitation. The models left us by the ancients
gave birth to all the arts about 200 years ago, and have mightily advanced their
progress in every country of Europe: Why had they not a like effect during the reign
of Trajan and his successors; when they were much more entire, and were still
admired and studied by the whole world? So late as the emperor Justinian,37 the Poet,
by way of distinction, was understood, among the Greeks, to be Homer; among the
Romans, Virgil. Such admiration still remained for these divine geniuses; though no
poet had appeared for many centuries, who could justly pretend to have imitated
them.
A man’s genius is always, in the beginning of life, as much unknown to himself as to
others; and it is only after frequent trials, attended with success, that he dares think
himself equal to those undertakings, in which those, who have succeeded, have fixed
the admiration of mankind. If his own nation be already possessed of many models of
eloquence, he naturally compares his own juvenile exercises with these; and being
sensible of the great disproportion, is discouraged from any farther attempts, and
never aims at a rivalship with those authors, whom he so much admires. A noble
emulation is the source of every excellence. Admiration and modesty naturally
extinguish this emulation. And no one is so liable to an excess of admiration and
modesty, as a truly great genius.
Next to emulation, the greatest encourager of the noble arts is praise and glory. A
writer is animated with new force, when he hears the applauses of the world for his
former productions; and, being roused by such a motive, he often reaches a pitch of
perfection, which is equally surprizing to himself and to his readers. But when the
posts of honour are all occupied, his first attempts are but coldly received by the
public; being compared to productions, which are both in themselves more excellent,
and have already the advantage of an established reputation. Were Moliere38 and
Corneille to bring upon the stage at present their early productions, which were
formerly so well received, it would discourage the young poets, to see the indifference
and disdain of the public. The ignorance of the age alone could have given admission
to the Prince ofTyre; but it is to that we owe the Moor: Had Every man in his humour
been rejected, we had never seen Volpone.39
Perhaps, it may not be for the advantage of any nation to have the arts imported from
their neighbours in too great perfection. This extinguishes emulation, and sinks the
ardour of the generous youth. So many models of Italian painting brought into
England, instead of exciting our artists, is the cause of their small progress in that
noble art. The same, perhaps, was the case of Rome, when it received the arts from
Greece. That multitude of polite productions in the French language, dispersed all
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 91 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
over Germany and the North, hinder these nations from cultivating their own
language, and keep them still dependent on their neighbours for those elegant
entertainments.
It is true, the ancients had left us models in every kind of writing, which are highly
worthy of admiration. But besides that they were written in languages, known only to
the learned; besides this, I say, the comparison is not so perfect or entire between
modern wits, and those who lived in so remote an age. Had Waller been born in
Rome, during the reign of Tiberius, his first productions had been despised, when
compared to the finished odes of Horace. But in this island the superiority of the
Roman poet diminished nothing from the fame of the English. We esteemed ourselves
sufficiently happy, that our climate and language could produce but a faint copy of so
excellent an original.
In short, the arts and sciences, like some plants, require a fresh soil; and however rich
the land may be, and however you may recruit it by art or care, it will never, when
once exhausted, produce any thing that is perfect or finished in the kind.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 92 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XV
THE EPICUREAN1
It is a great mortification° to the vanity of man, that his utmost art and industry can
never equal the meanest of nature’s productions, either for beauty or value. Art is only
the under-workman,° and is employed to give a few strokes of embellishment to those
pieces, which come from the hand of the master. Some of the drapery° may be of his
drawing; but he is not allowed to touch the principal figure. Art may make a suit of
clothes: But nature must produce a man.
Even in those productions, commonly denominated works of art, we find that the
noblest of the kind are beholden for their chief beauty to the force and happy
influence of nature. To thea native enthusiasm° of the poets, we owe whatever is
admirable in their productions. The greatest genius, where nature at any time fails
him, (for she is not equal) throws aside the lyre, and hopes not, from the rules of art,
to reach that divine harmony, which must proceed from her inspiration alone. How
poor are those songs, where a happy flow of fancy has not furnished materials for art
to embellish and refine!
But of all the fruitless attempts of art, no one is so ridiculous, as that which the severe
philosophers have undertaken, the producing of an artificial happiness, and making us
be pleased by rules of reason, and by reflection. Why did none of them claim the
reward, which Xerxes2 promised to him, who should invent a new pleasure? Unless,
perhaps, they invented so many pleasures for their own use, that they despised riches,
and stood in no need of any enjoyments, which the rewards of that monarch could
procure them. I am apt, indeed, to think, that they were not willing to furnish the
Persian court with a new pleasure, by presenting it with so new and unusual an object
of ridicule. Their speculations, when confined to theory, and gravely delivered in the
schools of Greece, might excite admiration in their ignorant pupils: But the attempting
to reduce such principles to practice would soon have betrayed their absurdity.
You pretend to make me happy by reason, and by rules of art. You must, then, create
me anew by rules of art. For on my original frame and structure does my happiness
depend. But you want power to effect this; and skill too, I am afraid: Nor can I
entertain a less opinion of nature’s wisdom than of yours. And let her conduct the
machine, which she has so wisely framed. I find, that I should only spoil it by my
tampering.
To what purpose should I pretend to regulate, refine, or invigorate any of those
springs or principles, which nature has implanted in me? Is this the road by which I
must reach happiness? But happiness implies ease, contentment, repose, and pleasure;
not watchfulness, care, and fatigue. The health of my body consists in the facility,
with which all its operations are performed. The stomach digests the aliments: The
heart circulates the blood: The brain separates and refines the spirits: And all this
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 93 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
without my concerning myself in the matter. When by my will alone I can stop the
blood, as it runs with impetuosity° along its canals, then may I hope to change the
course of my sentiments and passions. In vain should I strain my faculties, and
endeavour to receive pleasure from an object, which is not fitted by nature to affect
my organs with delight. I may give myself pain by my fruitless endeavours; but shall
never reach any pleasure.
Away then with all those vain pretences of making ourselves happy within ourselves,
of feasting on our own thoughts, of being satisfied with the consciousness of welldoing,
and of despising all assistance and all supplies from external objects. This is
the voice of Pride, not of Nature. And it were well, if even this pride could support
itself, and communicate a real inward pleasure, however melancholy or severe. But
this impotent pride can do no more than regulate the outside; and with infinite pains
and attention compose the language and countenance to a philosophical dignity, in
order to deceive the ignorant vulgar. The heart, mean while, is empty of all
enjoyment: And the mind, unsupported by its proper objects, sinks into the deepest
sorrow and dejection. Miserable, but vain mortal! Thy mind be happy within itself!
With what resources is it endowed to fill so immense a void, and supply the place of
all thy bodily senses and faculties? Can thy head subsist without thy other members?
In such a situation,
What foolish figure must it make?
Do nothing else but sleep and ake.3
Into such a lethargy, or such a melancholy, must thy mind be plunged, when deprived
of foreign occupations and enjoyments.
Keep me, therefore, no longer in this violent constraint. Confine me not within
myself; but point out to me those objects and pleasures, which afford the chief
enjoyment. But why do I apply to you, proud and ignorant sages, to shew me the road
to happiness? Let me consult my own passions and inclinations. In them must I read
the dictates of nature; not in your frivolous discourses.
But see, propitious to my wishes, the divine, the amiable Pleasure,4 the supreme love
of GODS and men, advances towards me. At her approach, my heart beats with genial
heat, and every sense and every faculty is dissolved in joy; while she pours around me
all the embellishments of the spring, and all the treasures of the autumn. The melody
of her voice charms my ears with the softest music, as she invites me to partake of
those delicious fruits, which, with a smile that diffuses a glory on the heavens and the
earth, she presents to me. The sportive Cupids, who attend her, or fan me with their
odoriferous° wings, or pour on my head the most fragrant oils, or offer me their
sparkling nectar in golden goblets. O! for ever let me spread my limbs on this bed of
roses, and thus, thus feel the delicious moments, with soft and downy steps, glide
along. But cruel chance! Whither do you fly so fast? Why do my ardent wishes, and
that load of pleasures, under which you labour, rather hasten than retard your
unrelenting pace? Suffer me to enjoy this soft repose, after all my fatigues in search of
happiness. Suffer me to satiate myself with these delicacies, after the pains of so long
and so foolish an abstinence.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 94 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
But it will not do. The roses have lost their hue: The fruit its flavour: And that
delicious wine, whose fumes, so late, intoxicated all my senses with such delight, now
solicits in vain the sated palate. Pleasure smiles at my languor. She beckons her sister,
Virtue, to come to her assistance. The gay, the frolic Virtue observes the call, and
brings along the whole troop of my jovial friends. Welcome, thrice welcome, my ever
dear companions, to these shady bowers,° and to this luxurious repast. Your presence
has restored to the rose its hue, and to the fruit its flavour. The vapours of this
sprightly nectar now again play around my heart; while you partake of my delights,
and discover in your chearful° looks, the pleasure which you receive from my
happiness and satisfaction. The like do I receive from yours; and encouraged by your
joyous presence, shall again renew the feast, with which, from too much enjoyment,
my senses were well nigh sated; while the mind kept not pace with the body, nor
afforded relief to her o’erburthened partner.
In our chearful discourses, better than in the formal reasonings of the schools,° is true
wisdom to be found. In our friendly endearments, better than in the hollow debates of
statesmen and pretended patriots, does true virtue display itself. Forgetful of the past,
secure of the future, let us here enjoy the present; and while we yet possess a being,
let us fix some good, beyond the power of fate or fortune. To-morrow will bring its
own pleasures along with it: Or should it disappoint our fond wishes, we shall at least
enjoy the pleasure of reflecting on the pleasures of to-day.
Fear not, my friends, that the barbarous dissonance of Bacchus,5 and of his revellers,
should break in upon this entertainment, and confound us with their turbulent and
clamorous pleasures. The sprightly muses wait around; and with their charming
symphony, sufficient to soften the wolves and tygers of the savage desert, inspire a
soft joy into every bosom. Peace, harmony and concord reign in this retreat; nor is the
silence ever broken but by the music of our songs, or the chearful accents of our
friendly voices.
But hark! the favourite of the muses, the gentle Damon,6 strikes the lyre; and while he
accompanies its harmonious notes with his more harmonious song, he inspires us with
the same happy debauch° of fancy, by which he is himself transported. “Ye happy
youth,” he sings, “Ye favoured of heaven,7 while the wanton° spring pours upon you
all her blooming honours, let not glory seduce you, with her delusive blaze, to pass in
perils and dangers this delicious season, this prime of life. Wisdom points out to you
the road to pleasure: Nature too beckons you to follow her in that smooth and flowery
path. Will you shut your ears to their commanding voice? Will you harden your heart
to their soft allurements? Oh, deluded mortals, thus to lose your youth, thus to throw
away so invaluable a present, to trifle with so perishing a blessing. Contemplate well
your recompence. Consider that glory, which so allures your proud hearts, and
seduces you with your own praises. It is an echo, a dream, nay the shadow of a dream,
dissipated by every wind, and lost by every contrary breath of the ignorant and illjudging
multitude. You fear not that even death itself shall ravish it from you. But
behold! while you are yet alive, calumny° bereaves you of it; ignorance neglects it;
nature enjoys it not; fancy alone, renouncing every pleasure receives this airy
recompence, empty and unstable as herself.”
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 95 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Thus the hours pass unperceived along, and lead in their wanton train all the pleasures
of sense, and all the joys of harmony and friendship. Smiling innocence closes the
procession; and while she presents herself to our ravished° eyes, she embellishes the
whole scene, and renders the view of these pleasures as transporting, after they have
past us, as when, with laughing countenances, they were yet advancing towards us.
But the sun has sunk below the horizon; and darkness, stealing silently upon us, has
now buried all nature in an universal shade. “Rejoice, my friends, continue your
repast, or change it for soft repose. Though absent, your joy or your tranquillity shall
still be mine.” But whither do you go? Or what new pleasures call you from our
society? Is there aught agreeable without your friends? And can aught please, in
which we partake not? “Yes, my friends; the joy which I now seek, admits not of your
participation. Here alone I wish your absence: And here alone can I find a sufficient
compensation for the loss of your society.”
But I have not advanced far through the shades of the thick wood, which spreads a
double night around me, ere, me-thinks, I perceive through the gloom, the charming
Cælia, the mistress of my wishes, who wanders impatient through the grove, and
preventing the appointed hour, silently chides my tardy steps. But the joy, which she
receives from my presence, best pleads my excuse; and dissipating every anxious and
every angry thought, leaves room for nought but mutual joy and rapture. With what
words, my fair one, shall I express my tenderness, or describe the emotions which
now warm my transported° bosom! Words are too faint to describe my love; and if,
alas! you feel not the same flame within you, in vain shall I endeavour to convey to
you a just conception of it. But your every word and every motion suffice to remove
this doubt; and while they express your passion, serve also to enflame mine. How
amiable this solitude, this silence, this darkness! No objects now importune the
ravished soul. The thought, the sense, all full of nothing but our mutual happiness,
wholly possess the mind, and convey a pleasure, which deluded mortals vainly seek
for in every other enjoyment.—
But whyb does your bosom heave with these sighs, while tears bathe your glowing
cheeks? Why distract your heart with such vain anxieties? Why so often ask me, How
long my love shall yet endure? Alas, my Cælia, can I resolve this question? Do I know
how long my life shall yet endure? But does this also disturb your tender breast? And
is the image of our frail mortality for ever present with you, to throw a damp on your
gayest hours, and poison even those joys which love inspires? Consider rather, that if
life be frail, if youth be transitory, we should well employ the present moment, and
lose no part of so perishable an existence. Yet a little moment and these shall be no
more. We shall be, as if we had never been. Not a memory of us be left upon earth;
and even the fabulous° shades below will not afford us a habitation. Our fruitless
anxieties, our vain projects, our uncertain speculations shall all be swallowed up and
lost. Our present doubts, concerning the original cause of all things, must never, alas!
be resolved. This alone we may be certain of, that, if any governing mind preside, he
must be pleased to see us fulfil the ends of our being, and enjoy that pleasure, for
which alone we were created. Let this reflection give ease to your anxious thoughts;
but render not your joys too serious, by dwelling for ever upon it. It is sufficient, once,
to be acquainted with this philosophy, in order to give an unbounded loose° to love
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 96 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and jollity,° and remove all the scruples of a vain superstition: But while youth and
passion, my fair one, prompt our eager desires, we must find gayer subjects of
discourse, to intermix with these amorous caresses.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 97 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XVI
THE STOIC1
There is this obvious and material difference in the conduct of nature, with regard to
man and other animals, that, having endowed the former with a sublime celestial
spirit, and having given him an affinity with superior beings, she allows not such
noble faculties to lie lethargic or idle; but urges him, by necessity, to employ, on
every emergence,° his utmost art and industry. Brute-creatures have many of their
necessities supplied by nature, being cloathed and armed by this beneficent parent of
all things: And where their own industry is requisite on any occasion, nature, by
implanting instincts, still supplies them with the art, and guides them to their good, by
her unerring precepts. But man, exposed naked and indigent to the rude elements,
rises slowly from that helpless state, by the care and vigilance of his parents; and
having attained his utmost growth and perfection, reaches only a capacity of
subsisting, by his own care and vigilance. Every thing is sold to skill and labour; and
where nature furnishes the materials, they are still rude and unfinished, till industry,
ever active and intelligent, refines them from their brute state, and fits them for human
use and convenience.
Acknowledge, therefore, O man, the beneficence of nature; for she has given thee that
intelligence which supplies all thy necessities. But let not indolence, under the false
appearance of gratitude, persuade thee to rest contented with her presents. Wouldest
thou return to the raw herbage for thy food, to the open sky for thy covering, and to
stones and clubs for thy defence against the ravenous animals of the desert? Then
return also to thy savage manners, to thy timorous° superstition, to thy brutal
ignorance; and sink thyself below those animals, whose condition thou admirest, and
wouldest so fondly imitate.
Thy kind parent, nature, having given thee art and intelligence, has filled the whole
globe with materials to employ these talents: Hearken to her voice, which so plainly
tells thee, that thou thyself shouldest also be the object of thy industry, and that by art
and attention alone thou canst acquire that ability, which will raise thee to thy proper
station in the universe. Behold this artizan, who converts a rude and shapeless stone
into a noble metal; and molding that metal by his cunning hands, creates, as it were by
magic, every weapon for his defence, and every utensil for his convenience. He has
not this skill from nature: Use and practice have taught it him: And if thou wouldest
emulate his success, thou must follow his laborious foot-steps.
But while thou ambitiously aspirest to perfecting thy bodily powers and faculties,
wouldest thou meanly neglect thy mind, and from a preposterous sloth,° leave it still
rude and uncultivated, as it came from the hands of nature? Far be such folly and
negligence from every rational being. If nature has been frugal in her gifts and
endowments, there is the more need of art to supply her defects. If she has been
generous and liberal, know that she still expects industry and application on our part,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 98 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and revenges herself in proportion to our negligent ingratitude. The richest genius,
like the most fertile soil, when uncultivated, shoots up into the rankest weeds; and
instead of vines and olives for the pleasure and use of man, produces, to its slothful
owner, the most abundant crop of poisons.
The great end of all human industry, is the attainment of happiness. For this were arts
invented, sciences cultivated, laws ordained, and societies modelled, by the most
profound wisdom of patriots and legislators. Even the lonely savage, who lies exposed
to the inclemency of the elements, and the fury of wild beasts, forgets not, for a
moment, this grand object of his being. Ignorant as he is of every art of life, he still
keeps in view the end of all those arts, and eagerly seeks for felicity amidst that
darkness with which he is environed. But as much as the wildest savage is inferior to
the polished citizen, who, under the protection of laws, enjoys every convenience
which industry has invented; so much is this citizen himself inferior to the man of
virtue, and the true philosopher, who governs his appetites, subdues his passions, and
has learned, from reason, to set a just value on every pursuit and enjoyment. For is
there an art and apprenticeship necessary for every other attainment? And is there no
art of life, no rule, no precepts to direct us in this principal concern? Can no particular
pleasure be attained without skill; and can the whole be regulated without reflection
or intelligence, by the blind guidance of appetite and instinct? Surely then no mistakes
are ever committed in this affair; but every man, however dissolute and negligent,
proceeds in the pursuit of happiness, with as unerring a motion, as that which the
celestial bodies observe, when, conducted by the hand of the Almighty, they roll
along the ethereal plains. But if mistakes be often, be inevitably committed, let us
register these mistakes; let us consider their causes; let us weigh their importance; let
us enquire for their remedies. When from this we have fixed all the rules of conduct,
we are philosophers: When we have reduced these rules to practice, we are sages.
Like many subordinate artists, employed to form the several wheels and springs of a
machine: Such are those who excel in all the particular arts of life. He is the master
workman who puts those several parts together; moves them according to just
harmony and proportion; and produces true felicity as the result of their conspiring
order.
While thou hast such an alluring object in view, shall that labour and attention,
requisite to the attainment of thy end, ever seem burdensome and intolerable? Know,
that this labour itself is the chief ingredient of the felicity to which thou aspirest, and
that every enjoyment soon becomes insipid and distasteful, when not acquired by
fatigue and industry. See the hardy hunters rise from their downy couches, shake off
the slumbers which still weigh down their heavy eye-lids, and, ere Aurora° has yet
covered the heavens with her flaming mantle, hasten to the forest. They leave behind,
in their own houses, and in the neighbouring plains, animals of every kind, whose
flesh furnishes the most delicious fare, and which offer themselves to the fatal stroke.
Laborious man disdains so easy a purchase. He seeks for a prey, which hides itself
from his search, or flies from his pursuit, or defends itself from his violence. Having
exerted in the chace every passion of the mind, and every member of the body, he
then finds the charms of repose, and with joy compares its pleasures to those of his
engaging labours.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 99 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
And can vigorous industry give pleasure to the pursuit even of the most worthless
prey, which frequently escapes our toils? And cannot the same industry render the
cultivating of our mind, the moderating of our passions, the enlightening of our
reason, an agreeable occupation; while we are every day sensible of our progress, and
behold our inward features and countenance brightening incessantly with new
charms? Begin by curing yourself of this lethargic indolence; the task is not difficult:
You need but taste the sweets of honest labour. Proceed to learn the just value of
every pursuit; long study is not requisite: Compare, though but for once, the mind to
the body, virtue to fortune, and glory to pleasure. You will then perceive the
advantages of industry: You will then be sensible what are the proper objects of your
industry.
In vain do you seek repose from beds of roses: In vain do you hope for enjoyment
from the most delicious wines and fruits. Your indolence itself becomes a fatigue:
Your pleasure itself creates disgust. The mind, unexercised, finds every delight insipid
and loathsome; and ere yet the body, full of noxious humours, feels the torment of its
multiplied diseases, your nobler part is sensible of the invading poison, and seeks in
vain to relieve its anxiety by new pleasures, which still augment the fatal malady.
I need not tell you, that, by this eager pursuit of pleasure, you more and more expose
yourself to fortune and accidents, and rivet your affections on external objects, which
chance may, in a moment, ravish from you. I shall suppose, that your indulgent stars
favour you still with the enjoyment of your riches and possessions. I prove to you,
that even in the midst of your luxurious pleasures, you are unhappy; and that by too
much indulgence, you are incapable of enjoying what prosperous fortune still allows
you to possess.
But surely the instability of fortune is a consideration not to be overlooked or
neglected. Happiness cannot possibly exist, where there is no security; and security
can have no place, where fortune has any dominion. Though that unstable deity
should not exert her rage against you, the dread of it would still torment you; would
disturb your slumbers, haunt your dreams, and throw a damp on the jollity of your
most delicious banquets.
The temple of wisdom is seated on a rock, above the rage of the fighting elements,
and inaccessible to all the malice of man. The rolling thunder breaks below; and those
more terrible instruments of human fury reach not to so sublime a height. The sage,
while he breathes that serene air, looks down with pleasure, mixed with compassion,
on the errors of mistaken mortals, who blindly seek for the true path of life, and
pursue riches, nobility, honour, or power, for genuine felicity. The greater part he
beholds disappointed of their fond wishes: Some lament, that having once possessed
the object of their desires, it is ravished from them by envious fortune: And all
complain, that even their own vows, though granted, cannot give them happiness, or
relieve the anxiety of their distracted minds.
But does the sage always preserve himself in this philosophical indifference, and rest
contented with lamenting the miseries of mankind, without ever employing himself
for their relief? Does he constantly indulge this severe wisdom, which, by pretending
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 100 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
to elevate him above human accidents, does in reality harden his heart, and render him
careless of the interests of mankind, and of society? No; he knows that in this sullen
Apathy, neither true wisdom nor true happiness can be found. He feels too strongly
the charm of the social affections ever to counteract so sweet, so natural, so virtuous a
propensity. Even when, bathed in tears, he laments the miseries of human race, of his
country, of his friends, and unable to give succour, can only relieve them by
compassion; he yet rejoices in the generous disposition, and feels a satisfaction
superior to that of the most indulged sense. So engaging are the sentiments of
humanity, that they brighten up the very face of sorrow, and operate like the sun,
which, shining on a dusky cloud or falling rain, paints on them the most glorious
colours which are to be found in the whole circle of nature.
But it is not here alone, that the social virtues display their energy. With whatever
ingredient you mix them, they are still predominant. As sorrow cannot overcome
them, so neither can sensual pleasure obscure them. The joys of love, however
tumultuous, banish not the tender sentiments of sympathy and affection. They even
derive their chief influence from that generous passion; and when presented alone,
afford nothing to the unhappy mind but lassitude° and disgust. Behold this sprightly
debauchee, who professes a contempt of all other pleasures but those of wine and
jollity: Separate him from his companions, like a spark from a fire, where before it
contributed to the general blaze: His alacrity suddenly extinguishes; and though
surrounded with every other means of delight, he lothes the sumptuous banquet, and
prefers even the most abstracted study and speculation, as more agreeable and
entertaining.
But the social passions never afford such transporting pleasures, or make so glorious
an appearance in the eyes both of GOD and man, as when, shaking off every earthly
mixture, they associate themselves with the sentiments of virtue, and prompt us to
laudable and worthy actions. As harmonious colours mutually give and receive a
lustre by their friendly union; so do these ennobling sentiments of the human mind.
See the triumph of nature in parental affection! What selfish passion; what sensual
delight is a match for it! Whether a man exults in the prosperity and virtue of his
offspring, or flies to their succour, through the most threatening and tremendous
dangers?
Proceed still in purifying the generous passion, you will still the more admire its
shining glories. What charms are there in the harmony of minds, and in a friendship
founded on mutual esteem and gratitude! What satisfaction in relieving the distressed,
in comforting the afflicted, in raising the fallen, and in stopping the career of cruel
fortune, or of more cruel man, in their insults over the good and virtuous! But what
supreme joy in the victories over vice as well as misery, when, by virtuous example or
wise exhortation, our fellow-creatures are taught to govern their passions, reform their
vices, and subdue their worst enemies, which inhabit within their own bosoms?
But these objects are still too limited for the human mind, which, being of celestial
origin, swells with the divinest and most enlarged affections, and carrying its attention
beyond kindred and acquaintance, extends its benevolent wishes to the most distant
posterity. It views liberty and laws as the source of human happiness, and devotes
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 101 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
itself, with the utmost alacrity, to their guardianship and protection. Toils, dangers,
death itself carry their charms, when we brave them for the public good, and ennoble
that being, which we generously sacrifice for the interests of our country. Happy the
man, whom indulgent fortune allows to pay to virtue what he owes to nature, and to
make a generous gift of what must otherwise be ravished from him by cruel necessity!
In the true sage and patriot are united whatever can distinguish human nature, or
elevate mortal man to a resemblance with the divinity. The softest benevolence, the
most undaunted resolution, the tenderest sentiments, the most sublime love of virtue,
all these animate successively his transported bosom. What satisfaction, when he
looks within, to find the most turbulent passions tuned to just harmony and concord,
and every jarring sound banished from this enchanting music! If the contemplation,
even of inanimate beauty, is so delightful; if it ravishes the senses, even when the fair
form is foreign to us: What must be the effects of moral beauty? And what influence
must it have, when it embellishes our own mind, and is the result of our own
reflection and industry?
But where is the reward of virtue? And what recompence has nature provided for
such important sacrifices, as those of life and fortune, which we must often make to
it? Oh, sons of earth! Are ye ignorant of the value of this celestial mistress? And do
ye meanly enquire for her portion, when ye observe her genuine charms? But know,
that nature has been indulgent to human weakness, and has not left this favourite
child, naked and unendowed. She has provided virtue with the richest dowry; but
being careful, lest the allurements of interest should engage such suitors, as were
insensible of the native worth of so divine a beauty, she has wisely provided, that this
dowry can have no charms but in the eyes of those who are already transported with
the love of virtue. Glory is the portion of virtue, the sweet reward of honourable toils,
the triumphant crown, which covers the thoughtful head of the disinterested patriot, or
the dusty brow of the victorious warrior. Elevated by so sublime a prize, the man of
virtue looks down with contempt on all the allurements of pleasure, and all the
menaces of danger. Death itself loses its terrors, when he considers, that its dominion
extends only over a part of him, and that, in spite of death and time, the rage of the
elements, and the endless vicissitude of human affairs, he is assured of an immortal
fame among all the sons of men.
There surely is a being who presides over the universe; and who, with infinite wisdom
and power, has reduced the jarring elements into just order and proportion. Let
speculative reasoners dispute, how far this beneficent being extends his care, and
whether he prolongs our existence beyond the grave, in order to bestow on virtue its
just reward, and render it fully triumphant. The man of morals, without deciding any
thing on so dubious a subject, is satisfied with the portion, marked out to him by the
supreme disposer of all things. Gratefully he accepts of that farther reward prepared
for him; but if disappointed, he thinks not virtue an empty name; but justly esteeming
it its own reward, he gratefully acknowledges the bounty of his creator, who, by
calling him into existence, has thereby afforded him an opportunity of once acquiring
so invaluable a possession.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 102 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XVII
THE PLATONIST1
To some philosophers it appears matter of surprize, that all mankind, possessing the
same nature, and being endowed with the same faculties, should yet differ so widely
in their pursuits and inclinations, and that one should utterly condemn what is fondly
sought after by another. To some it appears matter of still more surprize, that a man
should differ so widely from himself at different times; and, after possession, reject
with disdain what, before, was the object of all his vows and wishes. To me this
feverish uncertainty and irresolution, in human conduct, seems altogether
unavoidable; nor can a rational soul, made for the contemplation of the Supreme
Being, and of his works, ever enjoy tranquillity or satisfaction, while detained in the
ignoble pursuits of sensual pleasure or popular applause. The divinity is a boundless
ocean of bliss and glory: Human minds are smaller streams, which, arising at first
from this ocean, seek still, amid all their wanderings, to return to it, and to lose
themselves in that immensity of perfection. When checked in this natural course, by
vice or folly, they become furious and enraged; and, swelling to a torrent, do then
spread horror and devastation on the neighbouring plains.
In vain, by pompous phrase and passionate expression, each recommends his own
pursuit, and invites the credulous hearers to an imitation of his life and manners. The
heart belies the countenance, and sensibly feels, even amid the highest success, the
unsatisfactory nature of all those pleasures, which detain it from its true object. I
examine the voluptuous man before enjoyment; I measure the vehemence of his
desire, and the importance of his object; I find that all his happiness proceeds only
from that hurry of thought, which takes him from himself, and turns his view from his
guilt and misery. I consider him a moment after; he has now enjoyed the pleasure,
which he fondly sought after. The sense of his guilt and misery returns upon him with
double anguish: His mind tormented with fear and remorse; his body depressed with
disgust and satiety.
But a more august, at least a more haughty personage, presents himself boldly to our
censure; and assuming the title of a philosopher and man of morals, offers to submit
to the most rigid examination. He challenges, with a visible, though concealed
impatience, our approbation and applause; and seems offended, that we should
hesitate a moment before we break out into admiration of his virtue. Seeing this
impatience, I hesitate still more: I begin to examine the motives of his seeming virtue:
But behold! ere I can enter upon this enquiry, he flings himself from me; and
addressing his discourse to that crowd of heedless auditors, fondly abuses them by his
magnificent pretensions.
O philosopher! thy wisdom is vain, and thy virtue unprofitable. Thou seekest the
ignorant applauses of men, not the solid reflections of thy own conscience, or the
more solid approbation of that being, who, with one regard of his all-seeing eye,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 103 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
penetrates the universe. Thou surely art conscious of the hollowness of thy pretended
probity, whilst calling thyself a citizen, a son, a friend, thou forgettest thy higher
sovereign, thy true father, thy greatest benefactor. Where is the adoration due to
infinite perfection, whence every thing good and valuable is derived? Where is the
gratitude, owing to thy creator, who called thee forth from nothing, who placed thee
in all these relations to thy fellow-creatures, and requiring thee to fulfil the duty of
each relation, forbids thee to neglect what thou owest to himself, the most perfect
being, to whom thou art connected by the closest tye?
But thou art thyself thy own idol: Thou worshippest thy imaginary perfections: Or
rather, sensible of thy real imperfections, thou seekest only to deceive the world, and
to please thy fancy, by multiplying thy ignorant admirers. Thus, not content with
neglecting what is most excellent in the universe, thou desirest to substitute in his
place what is most vile and contemptible.
Consider all the works of mens hands; all the inventions of human wit, in which thou
affectest so nice a discernment: Thou wilt find, that the most perfect production still
proceeds from the most perfect thought, and that it is MIND alone, which we admire,
while we bestow our applause on the graces of a well-proportioned statue, or the
symmetry of a noble pile.° The statuary, the architect comes still in view, and makes
us reflect on the beauty of his art and contrivance, which, from a heap of unformed
matter, could extract such expressions and proportions. This superior beauty of
thought and intelligence thou thyself acknowledgest, while thou invitest us to
contemplate, in thy conduct, the harmony of affections, the dignity of sentiments, and
all those graces of a mind, which chiefly merit our attention. But why stoppest thou
short? Seest thou nothing farther that is valuable? Amid thy rapturous applauses of
beauty and order, art thou still ignorant where is to be found the most consummate
beauty? the most perfect order? Compare the works of art with those of nature. The
one are but imitations of the other. The nearer art approaches to nature, the more
perfect is it esteemed. But still, how wide are its nearest approaches, and what an
immense interval may be observed between them? Art copies only the outside of
nature, leaving the inward and more admirable springs and principles; as exceeding
her imitation; as beyond her comprehension. Art copies only the minute productions
of nature, despairing to reach that grandeur and magnificence, which are so
astonishing in the masterly works of her original. Can we then be so blind as not to
discover an intelligence and a design in the exquisite and most stupendous
contrivance of the universe? Can we be so stupid as not to feel the warmest raptures
of worship and adoration, upon the contemplation of that intelligent being, so
infinitely good and wise?
The most perfect happiness, surely, must arise from the contemplation of the most
perfect object. But what more perfect than beauty and virtue? And where is beauty to
be found equal to that of the universe? Or virtue, which can be compared to the
benevolence and justice of the Deity? If aught can diminish the pleasure of this
contemplation, it must be either the narrowness of our faculties, which conceals from
us the greatest part of these beauties and perfections; or the shortness of our lives,
which allows not time sufficient to instruct us in them. But it is our comfort, that, if
we employ worthily the faculties here assigned us, they will be enlarged in another
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 104 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
state of existence, so as to render us more suitable worshippers of our maker: And that
the task, which can never be finished in time, will be the business of an eternity.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 105 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XVIII
THE SCEPTIC
I have long entertained a suspicion, with regard to the decisions of philosophers upon
all subjects, and found in myself a greater inclination to dispute, than assent to their
conclusions. There is one mistake, to which they seem liable, almost without
exception; they confine too much their principles, and make no account of that vast
variety, which nature has so much affected in all her operations. When a philosopher
has once laid hold of a favourite principle, which perhaps accounts for many natural
effects, he extends the same principle over the whole creation, and reduces to it every
phænomenon, though by the most violent and absurd reasoning. Our own mind being
narrow and contracted, we cannot extend our conception to the variety and extent of
nature; but imagine, that she is as much bounded in her operations, as we are in our
speculation.
But if ever this infirmity of philosophers is to be suspected on any occasion, it is in
their reasonings concerning human life, and the methods of attaining happiness. In
that case, they are led astray, not only by the narrowness of their understandings, but
by that also of their passions. Almost every one has a predominant inclination, to
which his other desires and affections submit, and which governs him, though,
perhaps, with some intervals, through the whole course of his life. It is difficult for
him to apprehend, that any thing, which appears totally indifferent to him, can ever
give enjoyment to any person, or can possess charms, which altogether escape his
observation. His own pursuits are always, in his account, the most engaging: The
objects of his passion, the most valuable: And the road, which he pursues, the only
one that leads to happiness.
But would these prejudiced reasoners reflect a moment, there are many obvious
instances and arguments, sufficient to undeceive them, and make them enlarge their
maxims and principles. Do they not see the vast variety of inclinations and pursuits
among our species; where each man seems fully satisfied with his own course of life,
and would esteem it the greatest unhappiness to be confined to that of his neighbour?
Do they not feel in themselves, that what pleases at one time, displeases at another, by
the change of inclination; and that it is not in their power, by their utmost efforts, to
recall that taste or appetite, which formerly bestowed charms on what now appears
indifferent or disagreeable? What is the meaning therefore of those general
preferences of the town or country life, of a life of action or one of pleasure, of
retirement or society; when besides the different inclinations of different men, every
one’s experience may convince him, that each of these kinds of life is agreeable in its
turn, and that their variety or their judicious mixture chiefly contributes to the
rendering all of them agreeable.
But shall this business be allowed to go altogether at adventures?° And must a man
consult only his humour and inclination, in order to determine his course of life,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 106 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
without employing his reason to inform him what road is preferable, and leads most
surely to happiness? Is there no difference then between one man’s conduct and
another?
I answer, there is a great difference. One man, following his inclination, in chusing his
course of life, may employ much surer means for succeeding than another, who is led
by his inclination into the same course of life, and pursues the same object. Are riches
the chief object of your desires? Acquire skill in your profession; be diligent in the
exercise of it; enlarge the circle of your friends and acquaintance; avoid pleasure and
expence; and never be generous, but with a view of gaining more than you could save
by frugality. Would you acquire the public esteem? Guard equally against the
extremes of arrogance and fawning. Let it appear that you set a value upon yourself,
but without despising others. If you fall into either of the extremes, you either provoke
men’s pride by your insolence, or teach them to despise you by your timorous
submission, and by the mean opinion which you seem to entertain of yourself.
These, you say, are the maxims of common prudence, and discretion; what every
parent inculcates on his child, and what every man of sense pursues in the course of
life, which he has chosen.—What is it then you desire more? Do you come to a
philosopher as to a cunning man, to learn something by magic or witchcraft, beyond
what can be known by common prudence and discretion?—Yes; we come to a
philosopher to be instructed, how we shall chuse our ends, more than the means for
attaining these ends: We want to know what desire we shall gratify, what passion we
shall comply with, what appetite we shall indulge. As to the rest, we trust to common
sense, and the general maxims of the world for our instruction.
I am sorry then, I have pretended to be a philosopher: For I find your questions very
perplexing; and am in danger, if my answer be too rigid and severe, of passing for a
pedant and scholastic;° if it be too easy and free, of being taken for a preacher of vice
and immorality. However, to satisfy you, I shall deliver my opinion upon the matter,
and shall only desire you to esteem it of as little consequence as I do myself. By that
means you will neither think it worthy of your ridicule nor your anger.
If we can depend upon any principle, which we learn from philosophy, this, I think,
may be considered as certain and undoubted, that there is nothing, in itself, valuable
or despicable, desirable or hateful, beautiful or deformed; but that these attributes
arise from the particular constitution and fabric of human sentiment and affection.
What seems the most delicious food to one animal, appears loathsome to another:
What affects the feeling of one with delight, produces uneasiness in another. This is
confessedly the case with regard to all the bodily senses: But if we examine the matter
more accurately, we shall find, that the same observation holds even where the mind
concurs with the body, and mingles its sentiment with the exterior appetite.
Desire this passionate lover to give you a character of his mistress: He will tell you,
that he is at a loss for words to describe her charms, and will ask you very seriously if
ever you were acquainted with a goddess or an angel? If you answer that you never
were: He will then say, that it is impossible for you to form a conception of such
divine beauties as those which his charmer possesses; so complete a shape; such wellOnline
Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 107 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
proportioned features; so engaging an air; such sweetness of disposition; such gaiety
of humour. You can infer nothing, however, from all this discourse, but that the poor
man is in love; and that the general appetite between the sexes, which nature has
infused into all animals, is in him determined to a particular object by some qualities,
which give him pleasure. The same divine creature, not only to a different animal, but
also to a different man, appears a mere mortal being, and is beheld with the utmost
indifference.
Nature has given all animals a like prejudice in favour of their offspring. As soon as
the helpless infant sees the light, though in every other eye it appears a despicable and
a miserable creature, it is regarded by its fond parent with the utmost affection, and is
preferred to every other object, however perfect and accomplished. The passion alone,
arising from the original structure and formation of human nature, bestows a value on
the most insignificant object.
We may push the same observation further, and may conclude, that, even when the
mind operates alone, and feeling the sentiment of blame or approbation, pronounces
one object deformed and odious, another beautiful and amiable; I say, that, even in
this case, those qualities are not really in the objects, but belong entirely to the
sentiment of that mind which blames or praises. I grant, that it will be more difficult
to make this proposition evident, and as it were, palpable,° to negligent thinkers;
because nature is more uniform in the sentiments of the mind than in most feelings of
the body, and produces a nearer resemblance in the inward than in the outward part of
human kind. There is something approaching to principles in mental taste; and critics
can reason and dispute more plausibly than cooks or perfumers. We may observe,
however, that this uniformity among human kind, hinders not, but that there is a
considerable diversity in the sentiments of beauty and worth, and that education,
custom, prejudice, caprice, and humour, frequently vary our taste of this kind. You
will never convince a man, who is not accustomed to Italian music, and has not an ear
to follow its intricacies, that a Scotch tune is not preferable. You have not even any
single argument, beyond your own taste, which you can employ in your behalf: And
to your antagonist, his particular taste will always appear a more convincing argument
to the contrary. If you be wise, each of you will allow, that the other may be in the
right; and having many other instances of this diversity of taste, you will both confess,
that beauty and worth are merely of a relative nature, and consist in an agreeable
sentiment, produced by an object in a particular mind, according to the peculiar
structure and constitution of that mind.
By this diversity of sentiment, observable in human kind, nature has, perhaps,
intended to make us sensible of her authority, and let us see what surprizing changes
she could produce on the passions and desires of mankind, merely by the change of
their inward fabric, without any alteration on the objects. The vulgar may even be
convinced by this argument: But men, accustomed to thinking, may draw a more
convincing, at least a more general argument, from the very nature of the subject.
In the operation of reasoning, the mind does nothing but run over its objects, as they
are supposed to stand in reality, without adding any thing to them, or diminishing any
thing from them. If I examine the Ptolomaic and Copernican systems,1 I endeavour
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 108 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
only, by my enquiries, to know the real situation of the planets; that is in other words,
I endeavour to give them, in my conception, the same relations, that they bear towards
each other in the heavens. To this operation of the mind, therefore, there seems to be
always a real, though often an unknown standard, in the nature of things; nor is truth
or falsehood variable by the various apprehensions of mankind. Though all human
race should for ever conclude, that the sun moves, and the earth remains at rest, the
sun stirs not an inch from his place for all these reasonings; and such conclusions are
eternally false and erroneous.
But the case is not the same with the qualities of beautiful and deformed, desirable
and odious, as with truth and falsehood. In the former case, the mind is not content
with merely surveying its objects, as they stand in themselves: It also feels a
sentiment of delight or uneasiness, approbation or blame, consequent to that survey;
and this sentiment determines it to affix the epithet beautiful or deformed, desirable
or odious. Now, it is evident, that this sentiment must depend upon the particular
fabric or structure of the mind, which enables such particular forms to operate in such
a particular manner, and produces a sympathy or conformity between the mind and its
objects. Vary the structure of the mind or inward organs, the sentiment no longer
follows, though the form remains the same. The sentiment being different from the
object, and arising from its operation upon the organs of the mind, an alteration upon
the latter must vary the effect, nor can the same object, presented to a mind totally
different, produce the same sentiment.
This conclusion every one is apt to draw of himself, without much philosophy, where
the sentiment is evidently distinguishable from the object. Who is not sensible, that
power, and glory, and vengeance, are not desirable of themselves, but derive all their
value from the structure of human passions, which begets a desire towards such
particular pursuits? But with regard to beauty, either natural or moral, the case is
commonly supposed to be different. The agreeable quality is thought to lie in the
object, not in the sentiment; and that merely because the sentiment is not so turbulent
and violent as to distinguish itself, in an evident manner, from the perception of the
object.
But a little reflection suffices to distinguish them. A man may know exactly all the
circles and ellipses of the Copernican system, and all the irregular spirals of the
Ptolomaic, without perceiving that the former is more beautiful than the latter.
Euclid2 has fully explained every quality of the circle, but has not, in any proposition,
said a word of its beauty. The reason is evident. Beauty is not a quality of the circle. It
lies not in any part of the line whose parts are all equally distant from a common
center. It is only the effect, which that figure produces upon a mind, whose particular
fabric or structure renders it susceptible of such sentiments. In vain would you look
for it in the circle, or seek it, either by your senses, or by mathematical reasonings, in
all the properties of that figure.
The mathematician, who took no other pleasure in reading Virgil, but that of
examining Eneas’s voyage by the map, might perfectly understand the meaning of
every Latin word, employed by that divine author; and consequently, might have a
distinct idea of the whole narration. He would even have a more distinct idea of it,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 109 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
than they could attain who had not studied so exactly the geography of the poem. He
knew, therefore, every thing in the poem: But he was ignorant of its beauty; because
the beauty, properly speaking, lies not in the poem, but in the sentiment or taste of the
reader. And where a man has no such delicacy of temper, as to make him feel this
sentiment, he must be ignorant of the beauty, though possessed of the science and
understanding of an angel.3
The inference upon the whole is, that it is not from the value or worth of the object,
which any person pursues, that we can determine his enjoyment, but merely from the
passion with which he pursues it, and the success which he meets with in his pursuit.
Objects have absolutely no worth or value in themselves. They derive their worth
merely from the passion. If that be strong, and steady, and successful, the person is
happy. It cannot reasonably be doubted, but a little miss, dressed in a new gown for a
dancing-school ball, receives as compleat enjoyment as the greatest orator, who
triumphs in the spendor of his eloquence, while he governs the passions and
resolutions of a numerous assembly.
All the difference, therefore, between one man and another, with regard to life,
consists either in the passion, or in the enjoyment: And these differences are sufficient
to produce the wide extremes of happiness and misery.
To be happy, the passion must neither be too violent nor too remiss. In the first case,
the mind is in a perpetual hurry and tumult; in the second, it sinks into a disagreeable
indolence and lethargy.
To be happy, the passion must be benign and social; not rough or fierce. The
affections of the latter kind are not near so agreeable to the feeling, as those of the
former. Who will compare rancour and animosity, envy and revenge, to friendship,
benignity, clemency, and gratitude?
To be happy, the passion must be chearful and gay, not gloomy and melancholy. A
propensity to hope and joy is real riches: One to fear and sorrow, real poverty.
Some passions or inclinations, in the enjoyment of their object, are not so steady or
constant as others, nor convey such durable pleasure and satisfaction. Philosophical
devotion, for instance, like the enthusiasm of a poet, is the transitory effect of high
spirits, great leisure, a fine genius, and a habit of study and contemplation: But
notwithstanding all these circumstances, an abstract, invisible object, like that which
natural religion alone presents to us, cannot long actuate the mind, or be of any
moment in life. To render the passion of continuance, we must find some method of
affecting the senses and imagination, and must embrace some historical, as well as
philosophical account of the divinity. Popular superstitions and observances are even
found to be of use in this particular.
Though the tempers of men be very different, yet we may safely pronounce in
general, that a life of pleasure cannot support itself so long as one of business, but is
much more subject to satiety and disgust. The amusements, which are the most
durable, have all a mixture of application and attention in them; such as gaming and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 110 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
hunting. And in general, business and action fill up all the great vacancies in human
life.
But where the temper is the best disposed for any enjoyment, the object is often
wanting: And in this respect, the passions, which pursue external objects, contribute
not so much to happiness, as those which rest in ourselves; since we are neither so
certain of attaining such objects, nor so secure in possessing them. A passion for
learning is preferable, with regard to happiness, to one for riches.
Some men are possessed of great strength of mind; and even when they pursue
external objects, are not much affected by a disappointment, but renew their
application and industry with the greatest chearfulness. Nothing contributes more to
happiness than such a turn of mind.
According to this short and imperfect sketch of human life, the happiest disposition of
mind is the virtuous; or, in other words, that which leads to action and employment,
renders us sensible to the social passions, steels the heart against the assaults of
fortune, reduces the affections to a just moderation, makes our own thoughts an
entertainment to us, and inclines us rather to the pleasures of society and
conversation, than to those of the senses. This, in the mean time, must be obvious to
the most careless reasoner, that all dispositions of mind are not alike favourable to
happiness, and that one passion or humour may be extremely desirable, while another
is equally disagreeable. And indeed, all the difference between the conditions of life
depends upon the mind; nor is there any one situation of affairs, in itself, preferable to
another. Good and ill, both natural and moral, are entirely relative to human sentiment
and affection. No man would ever be unhappy, could he alter his feelings. Proteuslike,
he would elude all attacks, by the continual alterations of his shape and form.4
But of this resource nature has, in a great measure, deprived us. The fabric and
constitution of our mind no more depends on our choice, than that of our body. The
generality of men have not even the smallest notion, that any alteration in this respect
can ever be desirable. As a stream necessarily follows the several inclinations of the
ground, on which it runs; so are the ignorant and thoughtless part of mankind actuated
by their natural propensities. Such are effectually excluded from all pretensions to
philosophy, and the medicine of the mind, so much boasted. But even upon the wise
and thoughtful, nature has a prodigious influence; nor is it always in a man’s power,
by the utmost art and industry, to correct his temper, and attain that virtuous character,
to which he aspires. The empire of philosophy extends over a few; and with regard to
these too, her authority is very weak and limited. Men may well be sensible of the
value of virtue, and may desire to attain it; but it is not always certain, that they will
be successful in their wishes.
Whoever considers, without prejudice, the course of human actions, will find, that
mankind are almost entirely guided by constitution and temper, and that general
maxims have little influence, but so far as they affect our taste or sentiment. If a man
have a lively sense of honour and virtue, with moderate passions, his conduct will
always be conformable to the rules of morality; or if he depart from them, his return
will be easy and expeditious. On the other hand, where one is born of so perverse a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 111 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
frame of mind, of so callous and insensible a disposition, as to have no relish for
virtue and humanity, no sympathy with his fellow-creatures, no desire of esteem and
applause; such a one must be allowed entirely incurable, nor is there any remedy in
philosophy. He reaps no satisfaction but from low and sensual objects, or from the
indulgence of malignant passions: He feels no remorse to controul his vicious
inclinations: He has not even that sense or taste, which is requisite to make him desire
a better character: For my part, I know not how I should address myself to such a one,
or by what arguments I should endeavour to reform him. Should I tell him of the
inward satisfaction which results from laudable and humane actions, the delicate
pleasure of disinterested love and friendship, the lasting enjoyments of a good name
and an established character, he might still reply, that these were, perhaps, pleasures
to such as were susceptible of them; but that, for his part, he finds himself of a quite
different turn and disposition. I must repeat it; my philosophy affords no remedy in
such a case, nor could I do any thing but lament this person’s unhappy condition. But
then I ask, If any other philosophy can afford a remedy; or if it be possible, by any
system, to render all mankind virtuous, however perverse may be their natural frame
of mind? Experience will soon convince us of the contrary; and I will venture to
affirm, that, perhaps, the chief benefit, which results from philosophy, arises in an
indirect manner,a and proceeds more from its secret, insensible influence, than from
its immediate application.
It is certain, that a serious attention to the sciences and liberal arts softens and
humanizes the temper, and cherishes those fine emotions, in which true virtue and
honour consists. It rarely, very rarely happens, that a man of taste and learning is not,
at least, an honest man, whatever frailties may attend him. The bent of his mind to
speculative studies must mortify° in him the passions of interest and ambition, and
must, at the same time, give him a greater sensibility of all the decencies and duties of
life. He feels more fully a moral distinction in characters and manners; nor is his sense
of this kind diminished, but, on the contrary, it is much encreased, by speculation.
Besides such insensible changes upon the temper and disposition, it is highly
probable, that others may be produced by study and application. The prodigious
effects of education may convince us, that the mind is not altogether stubborn and
inflexible, but will admit of many alterations from its original make and structure. Let
a man propose to himself the model of a character, which he approves: Let him be
well acquainted with those particulars, in which his own character deviates from this
model: Let him keep a constant watch over himself, and bend his mind, by a continual
effort, from the vices, towards the virtues; and I doubt not but, in time, he will find, in
his temper, an alteration for the better.
Habit is another powerful means of reforming the mind, and implanting in it good
dispositions and inclinations. A man, who continues in a course of sobriety and
temperance, will hate riot and disorder: If he engage in business or study, indolence
will seem a punishment to him: If he constrain himself to practise beneficence and
affability, he will soon abhor all instances of pride and violence. Where one is
thoroughly convinced that the virtuous course of life is preferable; if he have but
resolution enough, for some time, to impose a violence on himself; his reformation
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 112 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
needs not be despaired of. The misfortune is, that this conviction and this resolution
never can have place, unless a man be, before-hand, tolerably virtuous.
Here then is the chief triumph of art and philosophy: It insensibly refines the temper,
and it points out to us those dispositions which we should endeavour to attain, by a
constant bent of mind, and by repeated habit. Beyond this I cannot acknowledge it to
have great influence; and I must entertain doubts concerning all those exhortations
and consolations, which are in such vogue among speculative reasoners.
We have already observed, that no objects are, in themselves, desirable or odious,
valuable or despicable; but that objects acquire these qualities from the particular
character and constitution of the mind, which surveys them. To diminish therefore, or
augment any person’s value for an object, to excite or moderate his passions, there are
no direct arguments or reasons, which can be employed with any force or influence.
The catching of flies, like Domitian, if it give more pleasure, is preferable to the
hunting of wild beasts, like William Rufus, or conquering of kingdoms, like
Alexander.5
But though the value of every object can be determined only by the sentiment or
passion of every individual, we may observe, that the passion, in pronouncing its
verdict, considers not the object simply, as it is in itself, but surveys it with all the
circumstances, which attend it. A man transported with joy, on account of his
possessing a diamond, confines not his view to the glistering stone before him: He
also considers its rarity, and thence chiefly arises his pleasure and exultation. Here
therefore a philosopher may step in, and suggest particular views, and considerations,
and circumstances, which otherwise would have escaped us; and, by that means, he
may either moderate or excite any particular passion.
It may seem unreasonable absolutely to deny the authority of philosophy in this
respect: But it must be confessed, that there lies this strong presumption against it,
that, if these views be natural and obvious, they would have occurred of themselves,
without the assistance of philosophy; if they be not natural, they never can have any
influence on the affections. These are of a very delicate nature, and cannot be forced
or constrained by the utmost art or industry. A consideration, which we seek for on
purpose, which we enter into with difficulty, which we cannot retain without care and
attention, will never produce those genuine and durable movements of passion, which
are the result of nature, and the constitution of the mind. A man may as well pretend
to cure himself of love, by viewing his mistress through the artificial medium of a
microscope or prospect, and beholding there the coarseness of her skin, and
monstrous disproportion of her features, as hope to excite or moderate any passion by
the artificial arguments of a Seneca or an Epictetus.6 The remembrance of the natural
aspect and situation of the object, will, in both cases, still recur upon him. The
reflections of philosophy are too subtile and distant to take place in common life, or
eradicate any affection. The air is too fine to breathe in, where it is above the winds
and clouds of the atmosphere.
Another defect of those refined reflections, which philosophy suggests to us, is, that
commonly they cannot diminish or extinguish our vicious passions, without
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 113 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
diminishing or extinguishing such as are virtuous, and rendering the mind totally
indifferent and unactive. They are, for the most part, general, and are applicable to all
our affections. In vain do we hope to direct their influence only to one side. If by
incessant study and meditation we have rendered them intimate and present to us, they
will operate throughout, and spread an universal insensibility over the mind. When we
destroy the nerves,° we extinguish the sense of pleasure, together with that of pain, in
the human body.
It will be easy, by one glance of the eye, to find one or other of these defects in most
of those philosophical reflections, so much celebrated both in ancient and modern
times. Let not the injuries or violence of men, say the philosophers,7ever discompose
you by anger or hatred. Would you be angry at the ape for its malice, or the tyger for
its ferocity? This reflection leads us into a bad opinion of human nature, and must
extinguish the social affections. It tends also to prevent all remorse for a man’s own
crimes; when he considers, that vice is as natural to mankind, as the particular
instincts to brute-creatures.
All ills arise from the order of the universe, which is absolutely perfect. Would you
wish to disturb so divine an order for the sake of your own particular interest? What
if the ills I suffer arise from malice or oppression? But the vices and imperfections of
men are also comprehended in the order of the universe:
If plagues and earthquakes break not heav’n’s design,
Why then aBorgiaor aCatiline?8
Let this be allowed; and my own vices will also be a part of the same order.
To one who said, that none were happy, who were not above opinion, a Spartan
replied, then none are happy but knaves and robbers.9
,
b
Man is born to be miserable; and is he surprized at any particular misfortune? And
can he give way to sorrow and lamentation upon account of any disaster? Yes: He
very reasonably laments, that he should be born to be miserable. Your consolation
presents a hundred ills for one, of which you pretend to ease him.
You should always have before your eyes death, disease, poverty, blindness, exile,
calumny, and infamy, as ills which are incident to human nature. If any one of these
ills falls to your lot, you will bear it the better, when you have reckoned upon it. I
answer, if we confine ourselves to a general and distant reflection on the ills of human
life, that can have no effect to prepare us for them. If by close and intense meditation
we render them present and intimate to us, that is the true secret for poisoning all our
pleasures, and rendering us perpetually miserable.
Your sorrow is fruitless, and will not change the course of destiny. Very true: And for
that very reason I am sorry.
Cicero’s consolation for deafness is somewhat curious. How many languages are
there, says he, which you do not understand? ThePunic, Spanish, Gallic, Ægyptian,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 114 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
&c. With regard to all these, you are as if you were deaf, yet you are indifferent about
the matter. Is it then so great a misfortune to be deaf to one language more?10
I like better the repartee of Antipater the Cyreniac, when some women were
condoling with him for his blindness: What! says he, Do you think there are no
pleasures in the dark?11
Nothing can be more destructive, says Fontenelle,12to ambition, and the passion for
conquest, than the true system of astronomy. What a poor thing is even the whole
globe in comparison of the infinite extent of nature? This consideration is evidently
too distant ever to have any effect. Or, if it had any, would it not destroy patriotism as
well as ambition? The same gallant author adds with some reason, that the bright eyes
of the ladies are the only objects, which lose nothing of their lustre or value from the
most extensive views of astronomy, but stand proof against every system. Would
philosophers advise us to limit our affection to them?
cExile, says Plutarch to a friend in banishment, is no evil: Mathematicians tell us, that
the whole earth is but a point, compared to the heavens. To change one’s country then
is little more than to remove from one street to another. Man is not a plant, rooted to
a certain spot of earth: All soils and all climates are alike suited to him.13 These
topics are admirable, could they fall only into the hands of banished persons. But what
if they come also to the knowledge of those who are employed in public affairs, and
destroy all their attachment to their native country? Or will they operate like the
quack’s medicine, which is equally good for a diabetes and a dropsy?°
It is certain, were a superior being thrust into a human body, that the whole of life
would to him appear so mean, contemptible, and puerile,° that he never could be
induced to take part in any thing, and would scarcely give attention to what passes
around him. To engage him to such a condescension as to play even the part of a
Philip with zeal and alacrity, would be much more difficult, than to constrain the same
Philip, after having been a king and a conqueror during fifty years, to mend old shoes
with proper care and attention; the occupation which Lucian assigns him in the
infernal regions.14 Now all the same topics of disdain towards human affairs, which
could operate on this supposed being, occur also to a philosopher; but being, in some
measure, disproportioned to human capacity, and not being fortified by the experience
of any thing better, they make not a full impression on him. He sees, but he feels not
sufficiently their truth; and is always a sublime philosopher, when he needs not; that
is, as long as nothing disturbs him, or rouzes his affections. While others play, he
wonders at their keenness and ardour; but he no sooner puts in his own stake, than he
is commonly transported with the same passions, that he had so much condemned,
while he remained a simple spectator.
There are two considerations chiefly, to be met with in books of philosophy, from
which any important effect is to be expected, and that because these considerations
are drawn from common life, and occur upon the most superficial view of human
affairs. When we reflect on the shortness and uncertainty of life, how despicable seem
all our pursuits of happiness? And even, if we would extend our concern beyond our
own life, how frivolous appear our most enlarged and most generous projects; when
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 115 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
we consider the incessant changes and revolutions of human affairs, by which laws
and learning, books and governments are hurried away by time, as by a rapid stream,
and are lost in the immense ocean of matter? Such a reflection certainly tends to
mortify all our passions: But does it not thereby counterwork the artifice of nature,
who has happily deceived us into an opinion, that human life is of some importance?
And may not such a reflection be employed with success by voluptuous° reasoners, in
order to lead us, from the paths of action and virtue, into the flowery fields of
indolence and pleasure?
We are informed by Thucydides,15 that, during the famous plague of Athens, when
death seemed present to every one, a dissolute mirth and gaiety prevailed among the
people, who exhorted one another to make the most of life as long as it endured. The
same observation is made by Boccace with regard to the plague of Florence.16,
d A
like principle makes soldiers, during war, be more addicted to riot and expence, than
any other race of men. Present pleasure is always of importance; and whatever
diminishes the importance of all other objects must bestow on it an additional
influence and value.e
The second philosophical consideration, which may often have an influence on the
affections, is derived from a comparison of our own condition with the condition of
others. This comparison we are continually making, even in common life; but the
misfortune is, that we are rather apt to compare our situation with that of our
superiors, than with that of our inferiors. A philosopher corrects this natural infirmity,
by turning his view to the other side, in order to render himself easy in the situation,
to which fortune has confined him. There are few people, who are not susceptible of
some consolation from this reflection, though, to a very good-natured man, the view
of human miseries should rather produce sorrow than comfort, and add, to his
lamentations for his own misfortunes, a deep compassion for those of others. Such is
the imperfection, even of the best of these philosophical topics of consolation.17
I shall conclude this subject with observing, that, though virtue be undoubtedly the
best choice, when it is attainable; yet such is the disorder and confusion of human
affairs, that no perfect or regular distribution of happiness and misery is ever, in this
life, to be expected. Not only the goods of fortune, and the endowments of the body
(both of which are important), not only these advantages, I say, are unequally divided
between the virtuous and vicious, but even the mind itself partakes, in some degree, of
this disorder, and the most worthy character, by the very constitution of the passions,
enjoys not always the highest felicity.
It is observable, that, though every bodily pain proceeds from some disorder in the
part or organ, yet the pain is not always proportioned to the disorder; but is greater or
less, according to the greater or less sensibility of the part, upon which the noxious
humours exert their influence. A tooth-ach produces more violent convulsions of pain
than a phthisis° or a dropsy. In like manner, with regard to the œconomy of the mind,
we may observe, that all vice is indeed pernicious; yet the disturbance or pain is not
measured out by nature with exact proportion to the degree of vice, nor is the man of
highest virtue, even abstracting from external accidents, always the most happy. A
gloomy and melancholy disposition is certainly, to our sentiments, a vice or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 116 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
imperfection; but as it may be accompanied with great sense of honour and great
integrity, it may be found in very worthy characters; though it is sufficient alone to
imbitter life, and render the person affected with it completely miserable. On the other
hand, a selfish villain may possess a spring and alacrity of temper, a certain gaiety of
heart,f which is indeed a good quality, but which is rewarded much beyond its merit,
and when attended with good fortune, will compensate for the uneasiness and remorse
arising from all the other vices.
I shall add, as an observation to the same purpose, that, if a man be liable to a vice or
imperfection, it may often happen, that a good quality, which he possesses along with
it, will render him more miserable, than if he were completely vicious. A person of
such imbecility° of temper as to be easily broken by affliction, is more unhappy for
being endowed with a generous and friendly disposition, which gives him a lively
concern for others, and exposes him the more to fortune and accidents. A sense of
shame, in an imperfect character, is certainly a virtue; but produces great uneasiness
and remorse, from which the abandoned villain is entirely free. A very amorous
complexion, with a heart incapable of friendship, is happier than the same excess in
love, with a generosity of temper, which transports a man beyond himself, and renders
him a total slave to the object of his passion.
In a word, human life is more governed by fortune than by reason; is to be regarded
more as a dull pastime than as a serious occupation; and is more influenced by
particular humour, than by general principles. Shall we engage ourselves in it with
passion and anxiety? It is not worthy of so much concern. Shall we be indifferent
about what happens? We lose all the pleasure of the game by our phlegm° and
carelessness. While we are reasoning concerning life, life is gone; and death, though
perhaps they receive him differently, yet treats alike the fool and the philosopher. To
reduce life to exact rule and method, is commonly a painful, oft a fruitless occupation:
And is it not also a proof, that we overvalue the prize for which we contend? Even to
reason so carefully concerning it, and to fix with accuracy its just idea, would be
overvaluing it, were it not that, to some tempers, this occupation is one of the most
amusing, in which life could possibly be employed.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 117 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XIX
OF POLYGAMY AND DIVORCES
As marriage is an engagement entered into by mutual consent, and has for its end the
propagation of the species, it is evident, that it must be susceptible of all the variety of
conditions, which consent establishes, provided they be not contrary to this end.
A man, in conjoining himself to a woman, is bound to her according to the terms of
his engagement: In begetting children, he is bound, by all the ties of nature and
humanity, to provide for their subsistence and education. When he has performed
these two parts of duty, no one can reproach him with injustice or injury. And as the
terms of his engagement, as well as the methods of subsisting his offspring, may be
various, it is mere superstition to imagine, that marriage can be entirely uniform, and
will admit only of one mode or form. Did not human laws restrain the natural liberty
of men, every particular marriage would be as different as contracts or bargains of any
other kind or species.
As circumstances vary, and the laws propose different advantages, we find, that, in
different times and places, they impose different conditions on this important contract.
In Tonquin,1 it is usual for the sailors, when the ships come into harbour, to marry for
the season; and notwithstanding this precarious engagement, they are assured, it is
said, of the strictest fidelity to their bed, as well as in the whole management of their
affairs, from those temporary spouses.
I cannot, at present, recollect my authorities; but I have somewhere read, that the
republic of Athens, having lost many of its citizens by war and pestilence, allowed
every man to marry two wives, in order the sooner to repair the waste which had been
made by these calamities. The poet Euripides happened to be coupled to two noisy
Vixens who so plagued him with their jealousies and quarrels, that he became ever
after a professed woman hater; and is the only theatrical writer, perhaps the only poet,
that ever entertained an aversion to the sex.2
In that agreeable romance, called the History of theSevarambians,3 where a great
many men and a few women are supposed to be shipwrecked on a desert coast; the
captain of the troop, in order to obviate those endless quarrels which arose, regulates
their marriages after the following manner: He takes a handsome female to himself
alone; assigns one to every couple of inferior officers; and to five of the lowest rank
he gives one wife in common.a
The ancient Britons had a singular kind of marriage, to be met with among no other
people. Any number of them, as ten or a dozen, joined in a society together, which
was perhaps requisite for mutual defence in those barbarous times. In order to link
this society the closer, they took an equal number of wives in common; and whatever
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 118 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
children were born, were reputed to belong to all of them, and were accordingly
provided for by the whole community.
Among the inferior creatures, nature herself, being the supreme legislator, prescribes
all the laws which regulate their marriages, and varies those laws according to the
different circumstances of the creature. Where she furnishes, with ease, food and
defence to the newborn animal, the present embrace terminates the marriage; and the
care of the offspring is committed entirely to the female. Where the food is of more
difficult purchase, the marriage continues for one season, till the common progeny
can provide for itself; and then the union immediately dissolves, and leaves each of
the parties free to enter into a new engagement at the ensuing season. But nature,
having endowed man with reason, has not so exactly regulated every article of his
marriage contract, but has left him to adjust them, by his own prudence, according to
his particular circumstances and situation. Municipal laws° are a supply to the
wisdom of each individual; and, at the same time, by restraining the natural liberty of
men, make private interest submit to the interest of the public. All regulations,
therefore, on this head are equally lawful, and equally conformable to the principles
of nature; though they are not all equally convenient, or equally useful to society. The
laws may allow of polygamy, as among the Eastern nations; or of voluntary divorces,
as among the Greeks and Romans; or they may confine one man to one woman,
during the whole course of their lives, as among the modern Europeans. It may not be
disagreeable to consider the advantages and disadvantages, which result from each of
these institutions.
The advocates for polygamy may recommend it as the only effectual remedy for the
disorders of love, and the only expedient for freeing men from that slavery to the
females, which the natural violence of our passions has imposed upon us. By this
means alone can we regain our right of sovereignty; and, sating our appetite, reestablish
the authority of reason in our minds, and, of consequence, our own authority
in our families. Man, like a weak sovereign, being unable to support himself against
the wiles and intrigues of his subjects, must play one faction against another, and
become absolute by the mutual jealousy of the females. To divide and to govern is an
universal maxim; and by neglecting it, the Europeans undergo a more grievous and a
more ignominious slavery than the Turks or Persians, who are subjected indeed to a
sovereign, that lies at a distance from them, but in their domestic affairs rule with an
uncontroulable sway.b
On the other hand, it may be urged with better reason, that this sovereignty of the
male is a real usurpation, and destroys that nearness of rank, not to say equality,
which nature has established between the sexes. We are, by nature, their lovers, their
friends, their patrons: Would we willingly exchange such endearing appellations, for
the barbarous title of master and tyrant?
In what capacity shall we gain by this inhuman proceeding? As lovers, or as
husbands? The lover, is totally annihilated; and courtship, the most agreeable scene in
life, can no longer have place, where women have not the free disposal of themselves,
but are bought and sold, like the meanest animal. The husband is as little a gainer,
having found the admirable secret of extinguishing every part of love, except its
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 119 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
jealousy. No rose without its thorn; but he must be a foolish wretch indeed, that
throws away the rose and preserves only the thorn.c
But the Asiatic manners are as destructive to friendship as to love. Jealousy excludes
men from all intimacies and familiarities with each other. No one dares bring his
friend to his house or table, lest he bring a lover to his numerous wives. Hence all
over the east, each family is as much separate from another, as if they were so many
distinct kingdoms. No wonder then, that Solomon, living like an eastern prince, with
his seven hundred wives, and three hundred concubines, without one friend, could
write so pathetically concerning the vanity of the world.4 Had he tried the secret of
one wife or mistress, a few friends, and a great many companions, he might have
found life somewhat more agreeable. Destroy love and friendship; what remains in
the world worth accepting?
The bad education of children, especially children of condition,° is another
unavoidable consequence of these eastern institutions. Those who pass the early part
of life among slaves, are only qualified to be, themselves, slaves and tyrants; and in
every future intercourse, either with their inferiors or superiors, are apt to forget the
natural equality of mankind. What attention, too, can it be supposed a parent, whose
seraglio° affords him fifty sons, will give to instilling principles of morality or science
into a progeny, with whom he himself is scarcely acquainted, and whom he loves with
so divided an affection? Barbarism, therefore, appears, from reason as well as
experience, to be the inseparable attendant of polygamy.d
To render polygamy more odious, I need not recount the frightful effects of jealousy,
and the constraint in which it holds the fair-sex all over the east. In those countries
men are not allowed to have any commerce with the females, not even physicians,
when sickness may be supposed to have extinguished all wanton passions in the
bosoms of the fair, and, at the same time, has rendered them unfit objects of desire.
Tournefort tells us, that, when he was brought into the grand signior’s seraglio as a
physician, he was not a little surprized, in looking along a gallery, to see a great
number of naked arms, standing out from the sides of the room. He could not imagine
what this could mean; till he was told, that those arms, belonged to bodies, which he
must cure, without knowing any more about them, than what he could learn from the
arms. He was not allowed to ask a question of the patient, or even of her attendants,
lest he might find it necessary to enquire concerning circumstances, which the
delicacy of the seraglio allows not to be revealed.5 Hence physicians in the east
pretend to know all diseases from the pulse; as our quacks in Europe undertake to
cure a person merely from seeing his water. I suppose, had MonsieurTournefort been
of this latter kind, he would not, in Constantinople, have been allowed by the jealous
Turks to be furnished with materials requisite for exercising his art.
In another country, where polygamy is also allowed, they render their wives cripples,
and make their feet of no use to them, in order to confine them to their own houses.
But it will, perhaps, appear strange, that, in a European country, jealousy can yet be
carried to such a height, that it is indecent so much as to suppose that a woman of
rank can have feet or legs.e Witness the following story, which we have from very
good authority.6 When the mother of the late king of Spain was on her road towards
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 120 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Madrid, she passed through a little town in Spain, famous for its manufactory of
gloves and stockings. The magistrates of the place thought they could not better
express their joy for the reception of their new queen, than by presenting her with a
sample of those commodities, for which alone their town was remarkable. The major
domo, who conducted the princess, received the gloves very graciously: But when the
stockings were presented, he flung them away with great indignation, and severely
reprimanded the magistrates for this egregious piece of indecency. Know, says he,
that a queen ofSpainhas no legs. The young queen, who, at that time, understood the
language but imperfectly, and had often been frightened with stories of Spanish
jealousy, imagined that they were to cut off her legs. Upon which she fell a crying,
and begged them to conduct her back to Germany; for that she never could endure the
operation: And it was with some difficulty they could appease her. Philip IV. is said
never in his life to have laughed heartily, but at the recital of this story.f
Having rejected polygamy, and matched one man with one woman, let us now
consider what duration we shall assign to their union, and whether we shall admit of
those voluntary divorces, which were customary among the Greeks and Romans.
Those who would defend this practice may employ the following reasons.
How often does disgust and aversion arise after marriage, from the most trivial
accidents, or from an incompatibility of humour;° where time, instead of curing the
wounds, proceeding from mutual injuries, festers them every day the more, by new
quarrels and reproaches? Let us separate hearts, which were not made to associate
together. Each of them may, perhaps, find another for which it is better fitted. At least,
nothing can be more cruel than to preserve, by violence, an union, which, at first, was
made by mutual love, and is now, in effect, dissolved by mutual hatred.
But the liberty of divorces is not only a cure to hatred and domestic quarrels: It is also
an admirable preservative against them, and the only secret for keeping alive that
love, which first united the married couple. The heart of man delights in liberty: The
very image of constraint is grievous to it: When you would confine it by violence, to
what would otherwise have been its choice, the inclination immediately changes, and
desire is turned into aversion. If the public interest will not allow us to enjoy in
polygamy that variety, which is so agreeable in love; at least, deprive us not of that
liberty, which is so essentially requisite. In vain you tell me, that I had my choice of
the person, with whom I would conjoin myself. I had my choice, it is true, of my
prison; but this is but a small comfort, since it must still be a prison.
Such are the arguments which may be urged in favour of divorces: But there seem to
be these three unanswerable objections against them. First, What must become of the
children, upon the separation of the parents? Must they be committed to the care of a
step-mother; and instead of the fond attention and concern of a parent, feel all the
indifference or hatred of a stranger or an enemy? These inconveniencies are
sufficiently felt, where nature has made the divorce by the doom° inevitable to all
mortals: And shall we seek to multiply those inconveniencies, by multiplying
divorces, and putting it in the power of parents, upon every caprice, to render their
posterity miserable?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 121 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Secondly, If it be true, on the one hand, that the heart of man naturally delights in
liberty, and hates every thing to which it is confined; it is also true, on the other, that
the heart of man naturally submits to necessity, and soon loses an inclination, when
there appears an absolute impossibility of gratifying it. These principles of human
nature, you’ll say, are contradictory: But what is man but a heap of contradictions!
Though it is remarkable, that, where principles are, after this manner, contrary in their
operation, they do not always destroy each other; but the one or the other may
predominate on any particular occasion, according as circumstances are more or less
favourable to it. For instance, love is a restless and impatient passion, full of caprices
and variations: arising in a moment from a feature, from an air, from nothing, and
suddenly extinguishing after the same manner. Such a passion requires liberty above
all things; and therefore Eloisa had reason, when, in order to preserve this passion, she
refused to marry her beloved Abelard.
How oft, when prest to marriage, have I said,
Curse on all laws but those which love has made:
Love, free as air, at sight of human ties,
Spreads his light wings, and in a moment flies.7
But friendship is a calm and sedate affection, conducted by reason and cemented by
habit; springing from long acquaintance and mutual obligations; without jealousies or
fears, and without those feverish fits of heat and cold, which cause such an agreeable
torment in the amorous passion. So sober an affection, therefore, as friendship, rather
thrives under constraint, and never rises to such a height, as when any strong interest
or necessity binds two persons together, and gives them some common object of
pursuit.g We need not, therefore, be afraid of drawing the marriage-knot, which
chiefly subsists by friendship, the closest possible. The amity between the persons,
where it is solid and sincere, will rather gain by it: And where it is wavering and
uncertain, this is the best expedient for fixing it. How many frivolous quarrels and
disgusts are there, which people of common prudence endeavour to forget, when they
lie under a necessity of passing their lives together; but which would soon be inflamed
into the most deadly hatred, were they pursued to the utmost, under the prospect of an
easy separation?
In the third place, we must consider, that nothing is more dangerous than to unite two
persons so closely in all their interests and concerns, as man and wife, without
rendering the union entire and total. The least possibility of a separate interest must be
the source of endless quarrels and suspicions. The wife, not secure of her
establishment,° will still be driving some separate end or project;h and the husband’s
selfishness, being accompanied with more power, may be still more dangerous.
Should these reasons against voluntary divorces be deemed insufficient, I hope no
body will pretend to refuse the testimony of experience. At the time when divorces
were most frequent among the Romans, marriages were most rare; and Augustus was
obliged, by penal laws, to force men of fashion into the married state: A circumstance
which is scarcely to be found in any other age or nation.i The more ancient laws of
Rome, which prohibited divorces, are extremely praised by Dionysius
Halycarnassæus.8 Wonderful was the harmony, says the historian, which this
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 122 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
inseparable union of interests produced between married persons; while each of them
considered the inevitable necessity by which they were linked together, and
abandoned all prospect of any other choice or establishment.
The exclusion of polygamy and divorces sufficiently recommends our present
European practice with regard to marriage.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 123 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XX
OF SIMPLICITY AND REFINEMENT IN WRITING
Fine writing, according to Mr. Addison, consists of sentiments, which are natural,
without being obvious. There cannot be a juster, and more concise definition of fine
writing.1
Sentiments, which are merely natural, affect not the mind with any pleasure, and seem
not worthy of our attention. The pleasantries of a waterman,° the observations of a
peasant, the ribaldry of a porter or hackney coachman, all of these are natural, and
disagreeable. What an insipid comedy should we make of the chit-chat of the teatable,
copied faithfully and at full length? Nothing can please persons of taste, but
nature drawn with all her graces and ornaments, la belle nature;° or if we copy low
life, the strokes must be strong and remarkable, and must convey a lively image to the
mind. The absurd naivetya of Sancho Pancho is represented in such inimitable
colours by Cervantes, that it entertains as much as the picture of the most
magnanimous hero or softest lover.2
The case is the same with orators, philosophers, critics, or any author who speaks in
his own person, without introducing other speakers or actors. If his language be not
elegant, his observations uncommon, his sense strong and masculine, he will in vain
boast his nature and simplicity. He may be correct; but he never will be agreeable. It
is the unhappiness of such authors, that they are never blamed or censured. The good
fortune of a book, and that of a man, are not the same. The secret deceiving path of
life, which Horace talks of, fallentis semita vitæ,3 may be the happiest lot of the one;
but is the greatest misfortune, which the other can possibly fall into.
On the other hand, productions, which are merely surprising, without being natural,
can never give any lasting entertainment to the mind. To draw chimeras is not,
properly speaking, to copy or imitate. The justness of the representation is lost, and
the mind is displeased to find a picture, which bears no resemblance to any original.
Nor are such excessive refinements more agreeable in the epistolary° or philosophic
style, than in the epic or tragic. Too much ornament is a fault in every kind of
production. Uncommon expressions, strong flashes of wit, pointed similies, and
epigrammatic turns, especially when they recur too frequently, are a disfigurement,
rather than any embellishment of discourse. As the eye, in surveying a Gothic
building, is distracted by the multiplicity of ornaments, and loses the whole by its
minute attention to the parts; so the mind, in perusing a work overstocked with wit, is
fatigued and disgusted with the constant endeavour to shine and surprize. This is the
case where a writer overabounds in wit, even though that wit, in itself, should be just
and agreeable. But it commonly happens to such writers, that they seek for their
favourite ornaments, even where the subject does not afford them; and by that means,
have twenty insipid conceits for one thought which is really beautiful.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 124 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
There is no subject in critical learning more copious,° than this of the just mixture of
simplicity and refinement in writing; and therefore, not to wander in too large a field,
I shall confine myself to a few general observations on that head.
First, I observe, That though excesses of both kinds are to be avoided, and though a
proper medium ought to be studied in all productions; yet this medium lies not in a
point, but admits of a considerable latitude. Consider the wide distance, in this
respect, between Mr. Pope and Lucretius. These seem to lie in the two greatest
extremes of refinement and simplicity, in which a poet can indulge himself, without
being guilty of any blameable excess. All this interval may be filled with poets, who
may differ from each other, but may be equally admirable, each in his peculiar stile
and manner. Corneille and Congreve,4 who carry their wit and refinement somewhat
farther than Mr. Pope (if poets of so different a kind can be compared together), and
Sophocles5 and Terence, who are more simple than Lucretius, seem to have gone out
of that medium, in which the most perfect productions are found, and to be guilty of
some excess in these opposite characters. Of all the great poets, Virgil and Racine,6 in
my opinion, lie nearest the center, and are the farthest removed from both the
extremities.
My second observation on this head is, That it is very difficult, if not impossible, to
explain by words, where the just medium lies between the excesses of simplicity and
refinement, or to give any rule by which we can know precisely the bounds between
the fault and the beauty. A critic may not only discourse very judiciously on this head,
without instructing his readers, but even without understanding the matter perfectly
himself. There is not a finer piece of criticism than the dissertation on pastorals by
Fontenelle;7 in which, by a number of reflections and philosophical reasonings, he
endeavours to fix the just medium, which is suitable to that species of writing. But let
any one read the pastorals of that author, and he will be convinced, that this judicious
critic, notwithstanding his fine reasonings, had a false taste, and fixed the point of
perfection much nearer the extreme of refinement than pastoral poetry will admit of.
The sentiments of his shepherds are better suited to the toilettes° of Paris, than to the
forests of Arcadia.° But this it is impossible to discover from his critical reasonings.
He blames all excessive painting and ornament as much as Virgil could have done,
had that great poet writ a dissertation on this species of poetry. However different the
tastes of men, their general discourse on these subjects is commonly the same. No
criticism can be instructive, which descends not to particulars, and is not full of
examples and illustrations. It is allowed on all hands, that beauty, as well as virtue,
always lies in a medium; but where this medium is placed, is the great question, and
can never be sufficiently explained by general reasonings.
I shall deliver it as a third observation on this subject, That we ought to be more on
our guard against the excess of refinement than that of simplicity; and that because
the former excess is both less beautiful, and more dangerous than the latter.
It is a certain rule, that wit and passion are entirely incompatible. When the affections
are moved, there is no place for the imagination. The mind of man being naturally
limited, it is impossible that all its faculties can operate at once: And the more any one
predominates, the less room is there for the others to exert their vigour. For this
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 125 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
reason, a greater degree of simplicity is required in all compositions, where men, and
actions, and passions are painted, than in such as consist of reflections and
observations. And as the former species of writing is the more engaging and beautiful,
one may safely, upon this account, give the preference to the extreme of simplicity
above that of refinement.
We may also observe, that those compositions, which we read the oftenest, and which
every man of taste has got by heart, have the recommendation of simplicity, and have
nothing surprizing in the thought, when divested of that elegance of expression, and
harmony of numbers, with which it is cloathed. If the merit of the composition lie in a
point of wit; it may strike at first; but the mind anticipates the thought in the second
perusal, and is no longer affected by it. When I read an epigram of Martial,8 the first
line recalls the whole; and I have no pleasure in repeating to myself what I know
already. But each line, each word in Catullus, has its merit; and I am never tired with
the perusal of him. It is sufficient to run over Cowley once:9 But Parnel,10 after the
fiftieth reading, is as fresh as at the first. Besides, it is with books as with women,
where a certain plainness of manner and of dress is more engaging than that glare of
paint and airs and apparel, which may dazzle the eye, but reaches not the affections.
Terence is a modest and bashful beauty, to whom we grant every thing, because he
assumes nothing, and whose purity and nature make a durable, though not a violent
impression on us.
But refinement, as it is the less beautiful, so is it the more dangerous extreme, and
what we are the aptest to fall into. Simplicity passes for dulness, when it is not
accompanied with great elegance and propriety. On the contrary, there is something
surprizing in a blaze of wit and conceit.° Ordinary readers are mightily struck with it,
and falsely imagine it to be the most difficult, as well as most excellent way of
writing. Seneca abounds with agreeable faults, says Quintilian, abundat dulcibus
vitiis;11 and for that reason is the more dangerous, and the more apt to pervert the
taste of the young and inconsiderate.
I shall add, that the excess of refinement is now more to be guarded against than ever;
because it is the extreme, which men are the most apt to fall into, after learning has
made some progress, and after eminent writers have appeared in every species of
composition. The endeavour to please by novelty leads men wide of simplicity and
nature, and fills their writings with affectation and conceit. It was thus the Asiatic
eloquence degenerated so much from the Attic:b It was thus the age of Claudius and
Nero became so much inferior to that of Augustus in taste and genius: And perhaps
there are, at present, some symptoms of a like degeneracy of taste, in France as well
as in England.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 126 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XXI
OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS
Thevulgar° are apt to carry all national characters to extremes; and having once
established it as a principle, that any people are knavish, or cowardly, or ignorant,
they will admit of no exception, but comprehend every individual under the same
censure. Men of sense condemn these undistinguishing judgments: Though at the
same time, they allow, that each nation has a peculiar set of manners, and that some
particular qualities are more frequently to be met with among one people than among
their neighbours. The common people in Switzerland have probably more honesty
than those of the same rank in Ireland; and every prudent man will, from that
circumstance alone, make a difference in the trust which he reposes in each. We have
reason to expect greater wit and gaiety in a Frenchman than in a Spaniard; though
Cervantes was born in Spain. An Englishman will naturally be supposed to have more
knowledge than a Dane; though Tycho Brahe was a native of Denmark.1
Different reasons are assigned for these national characters; while some account for
them from moral, others from physical causes. By moral causes, I mean all
circumstances, which are fitted to work on the mind as motives or reasons, and which
render a peculiar set of manners habitual to us. Of this kind are, the nature of the
government, the revolutions of public affairs, the plenty or penury in which the people
live, the situation of the nation with regard to its neighbours, and such like
circumstances. By physical causes I mean those qualities of the air and climate, which
are supposed to work insensibly on the temper, by altering the tone and habit of the
body, and giving a particular complexion,° which, though reflection and reason may
sometimes overcome it, will yet prevail among the generality of mankind, and have
an influence on their manners.
That the character of a nation will much depend on moral causes, must be evident to
the most superficial observer; since a nation is nothing but a collection of individuals,
and the manners of individuals are frequently determined by these causes. As poverty
and hard labour debase the minds of the common people, and render them unfit for
any science and ingenious° profession; so where any government becomes very
oppressive to all its subjects, it must have a proportional effect on their temper and
genius, and must banish all the liberal arts from among them.a
The same principle of moral causes fixes the character of different professions, and
alters even that disposition, which the particular members receive from the hand of
nature. A soldier and a priest are different characters, in all nations, and all ages; and
this difference is founded on circumstances, whose operation is eternal and
unalterable.
The uncertainty of their life makes soldiers lavish and generous, as well as brave:
Their idleness, together with the large societies, which they form in camps or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 127 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
garrisons, inclines them to pleasure and gallantry: By their frequent change of
company, they acquire good breeding and an openness of behaviour: Being employed
only against a public and an open enemy, they become candid, honest, and
undesigning: And as they use more the labour of the body than that of the mind, they
are commonly thoughtless and ignorant.2
It is a trite, but not altogether a false maxim, that priests of all religions are the same;
and though the character of the profession will not, in every instance, prevail over the
personal character, yet is it sure always to predominate with the greater number. For
as chymists observe, that spirits, when raised to a certain height, are all the same,
from whatever materials they be extracted; so these men, being elevated above
humanity, acquire a uniform character, which is entirely their own, and which, in my
opinion, is, generally speaking, not the most amiable that is to be met with in human
society. It is, in most points, opposite to that of a soldier; as is the way of life, from
which it is derived.3
As to physical causes, I am inclined to doubt altogether of their operation in this
particular; nor do I think, that men owe any thing of their temper or genius to the air,
food, or climate. I confess, that the contrary opinion may justly, at first sight, seem
probable; since we find, that these circumstances have an influence over every other
animal, and that even those creatures, which are fitted to live in all climates, such as
dogs, horses, &c. do not attain the same perfection in all. The courage of bull-dogs
and game-cocks seems peculiar to England. Flanders is remarkable for large and
heavy horses: Spain for horses light, and of good mettle. And any breed of these
creatures, transplanted from one country to another, will soon lose the qualities, which
they derived from their native climate. It may be asked, why not the same with
men?4
,
d
There are few questions more curious than this, or which will oftener occur in our
enquiries concerning human affairs; and therefore it may be proper to give it a full
examination.
The human mind is of a very imitative nature; nor is it possible for any set of men to
converse often together, without acquiring a similitude° of manners, and
communicating to each other their vices as well as virtues. The propensity to company
and society is strong in all rational creatures; and the same disposition, which gives us
this propensity, makes us enter deeply into each other’s sentiments, and causes like
passions and inclinations to run, as it were, by contagion, through the whole club or
knot° of companions. Where a number of men are united into one political body, the
occasions of their intercourse must be so frequent, for defence, commerce, and
government, that, together with the same speech or language, they must acquire a
resemblance in their manners, and have a common or national character, as well as a
personal one, peculiar to each individual. Now though nature produces all kinds of
temper and understanding in great abundance, it does not follow, that she always
produces them in like proportions, and that in every society the ingredients of industry
and indolence, valour and cowardice, humanity and brutality, wisdom and folly, will
be mixed after the same manner. In the infancy of society, if any of these dispositions
be found in greater abundance than the rest, it will naturally prevail in the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 128 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
composition, and give a tincture to the national character. Or should it be asserted,
that no species of temper can reasonably be presumed to predominate, even in those
contracted societies, and that the same proportions will always be preserved in the
mixture; yet surely the persons in credit and authority, being still a more contracted
body, cannot always be presumed to be of the same character; and their influence on
the manners of the people, must, at all times, be very considerable. If on the first
establishment of a republic, a Brutus should be placed in authority,5 and be
transported with such an enthusiasm for liberty and public good, as to overlook all the
ties of nature, as well as private interest, such an illustrious example will naturally
have an effect on the whole society, and kindle the same passion in every bosom.
Whatever it be that forms the manners of one generation, the next must imbibe a
deeper tincture of the same dye; men being more susceptible of all impressions during
infancy, and retaining these impressions as long as they remain in the world. I assert,
then, that all national characters, where they depend not on fixed moral causes,
proceed from such accidents as these, and that physical causes have no discernible
operation on the human mind. It is a maxim in all philosophy, that causes, which do
not appear, are to be considered as not existing.f
If we run over the globe, or revolve the annals of history, we shall discover every
where signs of a sympathy or contagion of manners, none of the influence of air or
climate.
First. We may observe, that, where a very extensive government has been established
for many centuries, it spreads a national character over the whole empire, and
communicates to every part a similarity of manners. Thus the Chinese have the
greatest uniformity of character imaginable: though the air and climate, in different
parts of those vast dominions, admit of very considerable variations.
Secondly. In small governments, which are contiguous, the people have
notwithstanding a different character, and are often as distinguishable in their manners
as the most distant nations. Athens and Thebes were but a short day’s journey from
each other; though the Athenians were as remarkable for ingenuity, politeness, and
gaiety, as the Thebans for dulness, rusticity,° and a phlegmatic° temper. Plutarch,
discoursing of the effects of air on the minds of men, observes, that the inhabitants of
the Piræum possessed very different tempers from those of the higher town in Athens,
which was distant about four miles from the former: But I believe no one attributes
the difference of manners in Wapping and St. James’s, to a difference of air or
climate.6
Thirdly. The same national character commonly follows the authority of government
to a precise boundary; and upon crossing a river or passing a mountain, one finds a
new set of manners, with a new government. The Languedocians and Gascons are the
gayest people in France; but whenever you pass the Pyrenees, you are among
Spaniards. Is it conceivable, that the qualities of the air should change exactly with the
limits of an empire, which depend so much on the accidents of battles, negociations,
and marriages?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 129 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Fourthly. Where any set of men, scattered over distant nations, maintain a close
society or communication together, they acquire a similitude of manners, and have but
little in common with the nations amongst whom they live. Thus the Jews in Europe,
and the Armenians in the east, have a peculiar character; and the former are as much
noted for fraud, as the latter for probity.7 The Jesuits, in all Roman-catholic countries,
are also observed to have a character peculiar to themselves.8
Fifthly. Where any accident, as a difference in language or religion, keeps two
nations, inhabiting the same country, from mixing with each other, they will preserve,
during several centuries, a distinct and even opposite set of manners. The integrity,
gravity, and bravery of the Turks, form an exact contrast to the deceit, levity, and
cowardice of the modern Greeks.
Sixthly. The same set of manners will follow a nation, and adhere to them over the
whole globe, as well as the same laws and language. The Spanish, English, French
and Dutch colonies are all distinguishable even between the tropics.
Seventhly. The manners of a people change very considerably from one age to
another; either by great alterations in their government, by the mixtures of new
people, or by that inconstancy, to which all human affairs are subject. The ingenuity,
industry, and activity of the ancient Greeks have nothing in common with the
stupidity and indolence of the present inhabitants of those regions. Candour, bravery,
and love of liberty formed the character of the ancient Romans; as subtilty, cowardice,
and a slavish disposition do that of the modern. The old Spaniards were restless,
turbulent, and so addicted to war, that many of them killed themselves, when deprived
of their arms by the Romans.9 One would find an equal difficulty at present, (at least
one would have found it fifty years ago) to rouze up the modern Spaniards to arms.
The Batavians were all soldiers of fortune, and hired themselves into the Roman
armies. Their posterity make use of foreigners for the same purpose that the Romans
did their ancestors. Though some few strokes of the French character be the same
with that which Cæsar has ascribed to the Gauls; yet what comparison between the
civility, humanity, and knowledge of the modern inhabitants of that country, and the
ignorance, barbarity, and grossness of the ancient? Not to insist upon the great
difference between the present possessors of Britain, and those before the Roman
conquest; we may observe that our ancestors, a few centuries ago, were sunk into the
most abject superstition, last century they were inflamed with the most furious
enthusiasm, and are now settled into the most cool indifference with regard to
religious matters, that is to be found in any nation of the world.h
Eighthly. Where several neighbouring nations have a very close communication
together, either by policy, commerce, or travelling, they acquire a similitude of
manners, proportioned to the communication. Thus all the Franks° appear to have a
uniform character to the eastern nations. The differences among them are like the
peculiar accents of different provinces, which are not distinguishable, except by an ear
accustomed to them, and which commonly escape a foreigner.
Ninthly. We may often remark a wonderful mixture of manners and characters in the
same nation, speaking the same language, and subject to the same government: And
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 130 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
in this particular the English are the most remarkable of any people, that perhaps ever
were in the world. Nor is this to be ascribed to the mutability and uncertainty of their
climate, or to any other physical causes; since all these causes take place in the
neighbouring country of Scotland, without having the same effect. Where the
government of a nation is altogether republican, it is apt to beget a peculiar set of
manners. Where it is altogether monarchical, it is more apt to have the same effect;
the imitation of superiors spreading the national manners faster among the people. If
the governing part of a state consist altogether of merchants, as in Holland, their
uniform way of life will fix their character. If it consists chiefly of nobles and landed
gentry, like Germany, France, and Spain, the same effect follows. The genius of a
particular sect or religion is also apt to mould the manners of a people. But the
English government is a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy. The
people in authority are composed of gentry and merchants. All sects of religion are to
be found among them. And the great liberty and independency, which every man
enjoys, allows him to display the manners peculiar to him. Hence the English, of any
people in the universe, have the least of a national character; unless this very
singularity may pass for such.
If the characters of men depended on the air and climate, the degrees of heat and cold
should naturally be expected to have a mighty influence; since nothing has a greater
effect on all plants and irrational animals. And indeed there is some reason to think,
that all the nations, which live beyond the polar circles or between the tropics, are
inferior to the rest of the species, and are incapable of all the higher attainments of the
human mind. The poverty and misery of the northern inhabitants of the globe, and the
indolence of the southern, from their few necessities, may, perhaps, account for this
remarkable difference, without our having recourse to physical causes. This however
is certain, that the characters of nations are very promiscuous in the temperate
climates, and that almost all the general observations, which have been formed of the
more southern or more northern people in these climates, are found to be uncertain
and fallacious.10
Shall we say, that the neighbourhood of the sun inflames the imagination of men, and
gives it a peculiar spirit and vivacity. The French, Greeks, Egyptians, and Persians are
remarkable for gaiety. The Spaniards, Turks, and Chinese are noted for gravity and a
serious deportment, without any such difference of climate as to produce this
difference of temper.
The Greeks and Romans, who called all other nations barbarians, confined genius and
a fine understanding to the more southern climates, and pronounced the northern
nations incapable of all knowledge and civility. But our island has produced as great
men, either for action or learning, as Greece or Italy has to boast of.
It is pretended, that the sentiments of men become more delicate as the country
approaches nearer to the sun; and that the taste of beauty and elegance receives
proportional improvements in every latitude; as we may particularly observe of the
languages, of which the more southern are smooth and melodious, the northern harsh
and untuneable. But this observation holds not universally. The Arabic is uncouth and
disagreeable: The Muscovite° soft and musical. Energy, strength, and harshness form
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 131 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the character of the Latin tongue: The Italian is the most liquid, smooth, and
effeminate° language that can possibly be imagined. Every language will depend
somewhat on the manners of the people; but much more on that original stock of
words and sounds, which they received from their ancestors, and which remain
unchangeable, even while their manners admit of the greatest alterations. Who can
doubt, but the English are at present a more polite and knowing people than the
Greeks were for several ages after the siege of Troy? Yet is there no comparison
between the language of Milton and that of Homer. Nay, the greater are the alterations
and improvements, which happen in the manners of a people, the less can be expected
in their language. A few eminent and refined geniuses will communicate their taste
and knowledge to a whole people, and produce the greatest improvements; but they
fix the tongue by their writings, and prevent, in some degree, its farther changes.
Lord Bacon has observed, that the inhabitants of the south are, in general, more
ingenious than those of the north; but that, where the native of a cold climate has
genius, he rises to a higher pitch than can be reached by the southern wits. This
observation a late11 writer confirms, by comparing the southern wits to cucumbers,
which are commonly all good in their kind; but at best are an insipid fruit: While the
northern geniuses are like melons, of which not one in fifty is good; but when it is so,
it has an exquisite relish. I believe this remark may be allowed just, when confined to
the European nations, and to the present age, or rather to the preceding one: But I
think it may be accounted for from moral causes. All the sciences and liberal arts have
been imported to us from the south; and it is easy to imagine, that, in the first ardor of
application, when excited by emulation and by glory, the few, who were addicted to
them, would carry them to the greatest height, and stretch every nerve, and every
faculty, to reach the pinnacle of perfection. Such illustrious examples spread
knowledge every where, and begot an universal esteem for the sciences: After which,
it is no wonder, that industry relaxes; while men meet not with suitable
encouragement, nor arrive at such distinction by their attainments. The universal
diffusion of learning among a people, and the entire banishment of gross ignorance
and rusticity, is, therefore, seldom attended with any remarkable perfection in
particular persons. It seems to be taken for granted in the dialogue de Oratoribus,12
that knowledge was much more common in Vespasian’s age than in that of Cicero
and Augustus. Quintilian also complains of the profanation of learning, by its
becoming too common.j “Formerly,” says Juvenal, “science was confined to Greece
and Italy. Now the whole world emulates Athens and Rome. Eloquent Gaul has taught
Britain, knowing in the laws. Even Thule entertains thoughts of hiring rhetoricians for
its instruction.”13 This state of learning is remarkable; because Juvenal is himself the
last of the Roman writers, that possessed any degree of genius. Those, who
succeeded, are valued for nothing but the matters of fact, of which they give us
information. I hope the late conversion of Muscovy to the study of the sciences will
not prove a like prognostic to the present period of learning.
Cardinal Bentivoglio14 gives the preference to the northern nations above the
southern with regard to candour and sincerity; and mentions, on the one hand, the
Spaniards and Italians, and on the other, the Flemings and Germans. But I am apt to
think, that this has happened by accident. The ancient Romans seem to have been a
candid sincere people, as are the modern Turks. But if we must needs suppose, that
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 132 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
this event has arisen from fixed causes, we may only conclude from it, that all
extremes are apt to concur, and are commonly attended with the same consequences.
Treachery is the usual concomitant of ignorance and barbarism; and if civilized
nations ever embrace subtle and crooked politics, it is from an excess of refinement,
which makes them disdain the plain direct path to power and glory.
Most conquests have gone from north to south; and it has hence been inferred, that the
northern nations possess a superior degree of courage and ferocity. But it would have
been juster to have said, that most conquests are made by poverty and want upon
plenty and riches. The Saracens, leaving the deserts of Arabia, carried their conquests
northwards upon all the fertile provinces of the Roman empire; and met the Turks half
way, who were coming southwards from the deserts of Tartary.
An eminent writer15 has remarked, that all courageous animals are also carnivorous,
and that greater courage is to be expected in a people, such as the English, whose food
is strong and hearty, than in the half-starved commonalty of other countries. But the
Swedes, notwithstanding their disadvantages in this particular, are not inferior, in
martial courage, to any nation that ever was in the world.
In general, we may observe, that courage, of all national qualities, is the most
precarious; because it is exerted only at intervals, and by a few in every nation;
whereas industry, knowledge, civility, may be of constant and universal use, and for
several ages, may become habitual to the whole people. If courage be preserved, it
must be by discipline, example, and opinion. The tenth legion of Cæsar, and the
regiment of Picardy in France were formed promiscuously from among the citizens;
but having once entertained a notion, that they were the best troops in the service, this
very opinion really made them such.16
As a proof how much courage depends on opinion, we may observe, that, of the two
chief tribes of the Greeks, the Dorians, and Ionians, the former were always esteemed,
and always appeared more brave and manly than the latter; though the colonies of
both the tribes were interspersed and intermingled throughout all the extent of Greece,
the Lesser Asia, Sicily, Italy, and the islands of the Ægean sea. The Athenians were
the only Ionians that ever had any reputation for valour or military atchievements;
though even these were deemed inferior to the Lacedemonians, the bravest of the
Dorians.
The only observation, with regard to the difference of men in different climates, on
which we can rest any weight, is the vulgar° one, that people in the northern regions
have a greater inclination to strong liquors, and those in the southern to love and
women. One can assign a very probable physical cause for this difference. Wine and
distilled waters warm the frozen blood in the colder climates, and fortify men against
the injuries of the weather: As the genial heat of the sun, in the countries exposed to
his beams, inflames the blood, and exalts the passion between the sexes.
Perhaps too, the matter may be accounted for by moral causes. All strong liquors are
rarer in the north, and consequently are more coveted. Diodorus Siculus17 tells us,
that the Gauls in his time were great drunkards, and much addicted to wine; chiefly, I
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 133 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
suppose, from its rarity and novelty. On the other hand, the heat in the southern
climates, obliging men and women to go half naked, thereby renders their frequent
commerce more dangerous, and inflames their mutual passion. This makes parents
and husbands more jealous and reserved; which still farther inflames the passion. Not
to mention, that, as women ripen sooner in the southern regions, it is necessary to
observe greater jealousy and care in their education; it being evident, that a girl of
twelve cannot possess equal discretion to govern this passion, with one who feels not
its violence till she be seventeen or eighteen. Nothing so much encourages the passion
of love as ease and leisure, or is more destructive to it than industry and hard labour;
and as the necessities of men are evidently fewer in the warm climates than in the cold
ones, this circumstance alone may make a considerable difference between them.l
But perhaps the fact is doubtful, that nature has, either from moral or physical causes,
distributed these respective inclinations to the different climates. The ancient Greeks,
though born in a warm climate, seem to have been much addicted to the bottle; nor
were their parties of pleasure any thing but matches of drinking among men, who
passed their time altogether apart from the fair. Yet when Alexander led the Greeks
into Persia, a still more southern climate, they multiplied their debauches of this kind,
in imitation of the Persian manners.18 So honourable was the character of a drunkard
among the Persians, that Cyrus the younger, soliciting the sober Lacedemonians for
succour against his brother Artaxerxes, claims it chiefly on account of his superior
endowments, as more valorous, more bountiful, and a better drinker.19Darius
Hystaspes20 made it be inscribed on his tomb-stone, among his other virtues and
princely qualities, that no one could bear a greater quantity of liquor. You may obtain
any thing of the Negroes by offering them strong drink; and may easily prevail with
them to sell, not only their children, but their wives and mistresses, for a cask of
brandy. In France and Italy few drink pure wine, except in the greatest heats of
summer; and indeed, it is then almost as necessary, in order to recruit the spirits,
evaporated by heat, as it is in Sweden, during the winter, in order to warm the bodies
congealed by the rigour of the season.
If jealousy be regarded as a proof of an amorous disposition, no people were more
jealous than the Muscovites, before their communication with Europe had somewhat
altered their manners in this particular.
But supposing the fact true, that nature, by physical principles, has regularly
distributed these two passions, the one to the northern, the other to the southern
regions; we can only infer, that the climate may affect the grosser and more bodily
organs of our frame; not that it can work upon those finer organs, on which the
operations of the mind and understanding depend. And this is agreeable to the analogy
of nature. The races of animals never degenerate when carefully tended; and horses,
in particular, always show their blood in their shape, spirit, and swiftness: But a
coxcomb° may beget a philosopher; as a man of virtue may leave a worthless
progeny.
I shall conclude this subject with observing, that though the passion for liquor be
more brutal and debasing than love, which, when properly managed, is the source of
all politeness and refinement; yet this gives not so great an advantage to the southern
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 134 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
climates, as we may be apt, at first sight, to imagine. When love goes beyond a certain
pitch, it renders men jealous, and cuts off the free intercourse between the sexes, on
which the politeness of a nation will commonly much depend. And if we would
subtilize° and refine upon this point, we might observe, that the people, in very
temperate climates, are the most likely to attain all sorts of improvement; their blood
not being so inflamed as to render them jealous, and yet being warm enough to make
them set a due value on the charms and endowments of the fair sex.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 135 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XXII
OF TRAGEDY
It seems an unaccountable pleasure, which the spectators of a well-written tragedy
receive from sorrow, terror, anxiety, and other passions, that are in themselves
disagreeable and uneasy. The more they are touched and affected, the more are they
delighted with the spectacle; and as soon as the uneasy passions cease to operate, the
piece is at an end. One scene of full joy and contentment and security is the utmost,
that any composition of this kind can bear; and it is sure always to be the concluding
one. If, in the texture of the piece, there be interwoven any scenes of satisfaction, they
afford only faint gleams of pleasure, which are thrown in by way of variety, and in
order to plunge the actors into deeper distress, by means of that contrast and
disappointment. The whole art of the poet is employed, in rouzing and supporting the
compassion and indignation, the anxiety and resentment of his audience. They are
pleased in proportion as they are afflicted, and never are so happy as when they
employ tears, sobs, and cries to give vent to their sorrow, and relieve their heart,
swoln with the tenderest sympathy and compassion.
The few critics who have had some tincture of philosophy, have remarked this
singular phænomenon, and have endeavoured to account for it.
L’Abbe Dubos, in his reflections on poetry and painting, asserts, that nothing is in
general so disagreeable to the mind as the languid, listless state of indolence, into
which it falls upon the removal of all passion and occupation. To get rid of this
painful situation, it seeks every amusement and pursuit; business, gaming, shews,
executions; whatever will rouze the passions, and take its attention from itself. No
matter what the passion is: Let it be disagreeable, afflicting, melancholy, disordered;
it is still better than that insipid languor, which arises from perfect tranquillity and
repose.1
It is impossible not to admit this account, as being, at least in part, satisfactory. You
may observe, when there are several tables of gaming, that all the company run to
those, where the deepest play is, even though they find not there the best players. The
view, or, at least, imagination of high passions, arising from great loss or gain, affects
the spectator by sympathy, gives him some touches of the same passions, and serves
him for a momentary entertainment. It makes the time pass the easier with him, and is
some relief to that oppression, under which men commonly labour, when left entirely
to their own thoughts and meditations.
We find that common liars always magnify, in their narrations, all kinds of danger,
pain, distress, sickness, deaths, murders, and cruelties; as well as joy, beauty, mirth,
and magnificence. It is an absurd secret, which they have for pleasing their company,
fixing their attention, and attaching them to such marvellous relations, by the passions
and emotions, which they excite.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 136 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
There is, however, a difficulty in applying to the present subject, in its full extent, this
solution, however ingenious and satisfactory it may appear. It is certain, that the same
object of distress, which pleases in a tragedy, were it really set before us, would give
the most unfeigned uneasiness; though it be then the most effectual cure to languor
and indolence. Monsieur Fontenelle seems to have been sensible of this difficulty; and
accordingly attempts another solution of the phænomenon; at least makes some
addition to the theory above mentioned.2
“Pleasure and pain,” says he, “which are two sentiments so different in themselves,
differ not so much in their cause. From the instance of tickling, it appears, that the
movement of pleasure, pushed a little too far, becomes pain; and that the movement of
pain, a little moderated, becomes pleasure. Hence it proceeds, that there is such a
thing as a sorrow, soft and agreeable: It is a pain weakened and diminished. The heart
likes naturally to be moved and affected. Melancholy objects suit it, and even
disastrous and sorrowful, provided they are softened by some circumstance. It is
certain, that, on the theatre, the representation has almost the effect of reality; yet it
has not altogether that effect. However we may be hurried away by the spectacle;
whatever dominion the senses and imagination may usurp over the reason, there still
lurks at the bottom a certain idea of falsehood in the whole of what we see. This idea,
though weak and disguised, suffices to diminish the pain which we suffer from the
misfortunes of those whom we love, and to reduce that affliction to such a pitch as
converts it into a pleasure. We weep for the misfortune of a hero, to whom we are
attached. In the same instant we comfort ourselves, by reflecting, that it is nothing but
a fiction: And it is precisely that mixture of sentiments, which composes an agreeable
sorrow, and tears that delight us. But as that affliction, which is caused by exterior and
sensible objects, is stronger than the consolation which arises from an internal
reflection, they are the effects and symptoms of sorrow, that ought to predominate in
the composition.”
This solution seems just and convincing; but perhaps it wants still some new addition,
in order to make it answer fully the phænomenon, which we here examine. All the
passions, excited by eloquence, are agreeable in the highest degree, as well as those
which are moved by painting and the theatre. The epilogues of Cicero are, on this
account chiefly, the delight of every reader of taste; and it is difficult to read some of
them without the deepest sympathy and sorrow. His merit as an orator, no doubt,
depends much on his success in this particular. When he had raised tears in his judges
and all his audience, they were then the most highly delighted, and expressed the
greatest satisfaction with the pleader. The pathetic description of the butchery, made
by Verres of the Sicilian captains,3 is a masterpiece of this kind: But I believe none
will affirm, that the being present at a melancholy scene of that nature would afford
any entertainment. Neither is the sorrow here softened by fiction: For the audience
were convinced of the reality of every circumstance. What is it then, which in this
case raises a pleasure from the bosom of uneasiness, so to speak; and a pleasure,
which still retains all the features and outward symptoms of distress and sorrow?
I answer: This extraordinary effect proceeds from that very eloquence, with which the
melancholy scene is represented. The genius required to paint objects in a lively
manner, the art employed in collecting all the pathetic circumstances, the judgment
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 137 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
displayed in disposing them: the exercise, I say, of these noble talents, together with
the force of expression, and beauty of oratorial numbers,° diffuse the highest
satisfaction on the audience, and excite the most delightful movements. By this
means, the uneasiness of the melancholy passions is not only overpowered and
effaced by something stronger of an opposite kind; but the whole impulse of those
passions is converted into pleasure, and swells the delight which the eloquence raises
in us. The same force of oratory, employed on an uninteresting subject, would not
please half so much, or rather would appear altogether ridiculous; and the mind, being
left in absolute calmness and indifference, would relish none of those beauties of
imagination or expression, which, if joined to passion, give it such exquisite
entertainment. The impulse or vehemence, arising from sorrow, compassion,
indignation, receives a new direction from the sentiments of beauty. The latter, being
the predominant emotion, seize the whole mind, and convert the former into
themselves, at least tincture them so strongly as totally to alter their nature. And the
soul, being, at the same time, rouzed by passion, and charmed by eloquence, feels on
the whole a strong movement, which is altogether delightful.
The same principle takes place in tragedy; with this addition, that tragedy is an
imitation; and imitation is always of itself agreeable. This circumstance serves still
farther to smooth the motions of passion, and convert the whole feeling into one
uniform and strong enjoyment. Objects of the greatest terror and distress please in
painting, and please more than the most beautiful objects, that appear calm and
indifferent.4 The affection, rouzing the mind, excites a large stock of spirit and
vehemence; which is all transformed into pleasure by the force of the prevailing
movement. It is thus the fiction of tragedy softens the passion, by an infusion of a new
feeling, not merely by weakening or diminishing the sorrow. You may by degrees
weaken a real sorrow, till it totally disappears; yet in none of its gradations will it ever
give pleasure; except, perhaps, by accident, to a man sunk under lethargic indolence,
whom it rouzes from that languid state.
To confirm this theory, it will be sufficient to produce other instances, where the
subordinate movement is converted into the predominant, and gives force to it, though
of a different, and even sometimes though of a contrary nature.
Novelty naturally rouzes the mind, and attracts our attention; and the movements,
which it causes, are always converted into any passion, belonging to the object, and
join their force to it. Whether an event excite joy or sorrow, pride or shame, anger or
good-will, it is sure to produce a stronger affection, when new or unusual. And though
novelty of itself be agreeable, it fortifies the painful, as well as agreeable passions.
Had you any intention to move a person extremely by the narration of any event, the
best method of encreasing its effect would be artfully to delay informing him of it,
and first to excite his curiosity and impatience before you let him into the secret. This
is the artifice practised by Iago in the famous scene of Shakespeare; and every
spectator is sensible, that Othello’s jealousy acquires additional force from his
preceding impatience, and that the subordinate passion is here readily transformed
into the predominant one.5
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 138 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Difficulties encrease passions of every kind; and by rouzing our attention, and
exciting our active powers, they produce an emotion, which nourishes the prevailing
affection.
Parents commonly love that child most, whose sickly infirm frame of body has
occasioned them the greatest pains, trouble, and anxiety in rearing him. The agreeable
sentiment of affection here acquires force from sentiments of uneasiness.
Nothing endears so much a friend as sorrow for his death. The pleasure of his
company has not so powerful an influence.
Jealousy is a painful passion; yet without some share of it, the agreeable affection of
love has difficulty to subsist in its full force and violence. Absence is also a great
source of complaint among lovers, and gives them the greatest uneasiness: Yet
nothing is more favourable to their mutual passion than short intervals of that kind.
And if long intervals often prove fatal, it is only because, through time, men are
accustomed to them, and they cease to give uneasiness. Jealousy and absence in love
compose the dolce peccante° of the Italians, which they suppose so essential to all
pleasure.
There is a fine observation of the elder Pliny, which illustrates the principle here
insisted on. It is very remarkable, says he, that the last works of celebrated artists,
which they left imperfect, are always the most prized, such as theIrisofAristides,
theTyndaridesofNicomachus, theMedeaofTimomachus, and theVenusofApelles.
These are valued even above their finished productions: The broken lineaments of the
piece, and the half-formed idea of the painter are carefully studied; and our very grief
for that curious hand, which had been stopped by death, is an additional encrease to
our pleasure.6
These instances (and many more might be collected) are sufficient to afford us some
insight into the analogy of nature, and to show us, that the pleasure, which poets,
orators, and musicians give us, by exciting grief, sorrow, indignation, compassion, is
not so extraordinary or paradoxical, as it may at first sight appear. The force of
imagination, the energy of expression, the power of numbers, the charms of imitation;
all these are naturally, of themselves, delightful to the mind: And when the object
presented lays also hold of some affection, the pleasure still rises upon us, by the
conversion of this subordinate movement into that which is predominant. The passion,
though, perhaps, naturally, and when excited by the simple appearance of a real
object, it may be painful; yet is so smoothed, and softened, and mollified, when raised
by the finer arts, that it affords the highest entertainment.
To confirm this reasoning, we may observe, that if the movements of the imagination
be not predominant above those of the passion, a contrary effect follows; and the
former, being now subordinate, is converted into the latter, and still farther encreases
the pain and affliction of the sufferer.
Who could ever think of it as a good expedient for comforting an afflicted parent, to
exaggerate, with all the force of elocution, the irreparable loss, which he has met with
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 139 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
by the death of a favourite child? The more power of imagination and expression you
here employ, the more you encrease his despair and affliction.
The shame, confusion, and terror of Verres, no doubt, rose in proportion to the noble
eloquence and vehemence of Cicero: So also did his pain and uneasiness. These
former passions were too strong for the pleasure arising from the beauties of
elocution; and operated, though from the same principle, yet in a contrary manner, to
the sympathy, compassion, and indignation of the audience.
Lord Clarendon, when he approaches towards the catastrophe of the royal party,
supposes, that his narration must then become infinitely disagreeable; and he hurries
over the king’s death, without giving us one circumstance of it.7 He considers it as
too horrid a scene to be contemplated with any satisfaction, or even without the
utmost pain and aversion. He himself, as well as the readers of that age, were too
deeply concerned in the events, and felt a pain from subjects, which an historian and a
reader of another age would regard as the most pathetic and most interesting, and, by
consequence, the most agreeable.
An action, represented in tragedy, may be too bloody and atrocious. It may excite
such movements of horror as will not soften into pleasure; and the greatest energy of
expression, bestowed on descriptions of that nature, serves only to augment our
uneasiness. Such is that action represented in the Ambitious Stepmother,8 where a
venerable old man, raised to the height of fury and despair, rushes against a pillar, and
striking his head upon it, besmears it all over with mingled brains and gore. The
English theatre abounds too much with such shocking images.
Even the common sentiments of compassion require to be softened by some agreeable
affection, in order to give a thorough satisfaction to the audience. The mere suffering
of plaintive virtue, under the triumphant tyranny and oppression of vice, forms a
disagreeable spectacle, and is carefully avoided by all masters of the drama. In order
to dismiss the audience with entire satisfaction and contentment, the virtue must either
convert itself into a noble courageous despair, or the vice receive its proper
punishment.
Most painters appear in this light to have been very unhappy in their subjects. As they
wrought° much for churches and convents, they have chiefly represented such
horrible subjects as crucifixions and martyrdoms, where nothing appears but tortures,
wounds, executions, and passive suffering, without any action or affection. When they
turned their pencil from this ghastly mythology, they had commonly recourse to Ovid,
whose fictions, though passionate and agreeable, are scarcely natural or probable
enough for painting.
The same inversion of that principle, which is here insisted on, displays itself in
common life, as in the effects of oratory and poetry. Raise so the subordinate passion
that it becomes the predominant, it swallows up that affection which it before
nourished and encreased. Too much jealousy extinguishes love: Too much difficulty
renders us indifferent: Too much sickness and infirmity disgusts a selfish and unkind
parent.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 140 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
What so disagreeable as the dismal, gloomy, disastrous stories, with which
melancholy people entertain their companions? The uneasy passion being there raised
alone, unaccompanied with any spirit, genius, or eloquence, conveys a pure
uneasiness, and is attended with nothing that can soften it into pleasure or satisfaction.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 141 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XXIII
OF THE STANDARD OF TASTE
The great variety of Taste, as well as of opinion, which prevails in the world, is too
obvious not to have fallen under every one’s observation.1 Men of the most confined
knowledge are able to remark° a difference of taste in the narrow circle of their
acquaintance, even where the persons have been educated under the same
government, and have early imbibed the same prejudices. But those, who can enlarge
their view to contemplate distant nations and remote ages, are still more surprized at
the great inconsistence and contrariety. We are apt to call barbarous whatever departs
widely from our own taste and apprehension: But soon find the epithet of reproach
retorted on us. And the highest arrogance and self-conceit is at last startled, on
observing an equal assurance on all sides, and scruples,° amidst such a contest of
sentiment, to pronounce positively in its own favour.
As this variety of taste is obvious to the most careless enquirer; so will it be found, on
examination, to be still greater in reality than in appearance. The sentiments of men
often differ with regard to beauty and deformity of all kinds, even while their general
discourse is the same. There are certain terms in every language, which import blame,
and others praise; and all men, who use the same tongue, must agree in their
application of them. Every voice is united in applauding elegance, propriety,
simplicity, spirit in writing; and in blaming fustian,° affectation, coldness, and a false
brilliancy: But when critics come to particulars, this seeming unanimity vanishes; and
it is found, that they had affixed a very different meaning to their expressions. In all
matters of opinion and science, the case is opposite: The difference among men is
there oftener found to lie in generals than in particulars; and to be less in reality than
in appearance. An explanation of the terms commonly ends the controversy; and the
disputants are surprized to find, that they had been quarrelling, while at bottom they
agreed in their judgment.
Those who found morality on sentiment, more than on reason, are inclined to
comprehend ethics under the former observation, and to maintain, that, in all
questions, which regard conduct and manners, the difference among men is really
greater than at first sight it appears. It is indeed obvious, that writers of all nations and
all ages concur in applauding justice, humanity, magnanimity, prudence, veracity; and
in blaming the opposite qualities. Even poets and other authors, whose compositions
are chiefly calculated to please the imagination, are yet found from Homer down to
Fenelon,2 to inculcate the same moral precepts, and to bestow their applause and
blame on the same virtues and vices. This great unanimity is usually ascribed to the
influence of plain reason; which, in all these cases, maintains similar sentiments in all
men, and prevents those controversies, to which the abstract sciences are so much
exposed. So far as the unanimity is real, this account may be admitted as satisfactory:
But we must also allow that some part of the seeming harmony in morals may be
accounted for from the very nature of language. The word virtue, with its equivalent
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 142 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
in every tongue, implies praise; as that of vice does blame: And no one, without the
most obvious and grossest impropriety, could affix reproach to a term, which in
general acceptation is understood in a good sense; or bestow applause, where the
idiom requires disapprobation. Homer’s general precepts, where he delivers any such,
will never be controverted; but it is obvious, that, when he draws particular pictures of
manners, and represents heroism in Achilles and prudence in Ulysses, he intermixes a
much greater degree of ferocity in the former, and of cunning and fraud in the latter,
than Fenelon would admit of. The sage Ulysses in the Greek poet seems to delight in
lies and fictions, and often employs them without any necessity or even advantage:
But his more scrupulous son, in the French epic writer, exposes himself to the most
imminent perils, rather than depart from the most exact line of truth and veracity.
The admirers and followers of the Alcoran3 insist on the excellent moral precepts
interspersed throughout that wild and absurd performance. But it is to be supposed,
that the Arabic words, which correspond to the English, equity, justice, temperance,
meekness, charity, were such as, from the constant use of that tongue, must always be
taken in a good sense; and it would have argued the greatest ignorance, not of morals,
but of language, to have mentioned them with any epithets, besides those of applause
and approbation. But would we know, whether the pretended prophet had really
attained a just sentiment of morals? Let us attend to his narration; and we shall soon
find, that he bestows praise on such instances of treachery, inhumanity, cruelty,
revenge, bigotry, as are utterly incompatible with civilized society. No steady rule of
right seems there to be attended to; and every action is blamed or praised, so far only
as it is beneficial or hurtful to the true believers.
The merit of delivering true general precepts in ethics is indeed very small. Whoever
recommends any moral virtues, really does no more than is implied in the terms
themselves. That people, who invented the word charity, and used it in a good sense,
inculcated more clearly and much more efficaciously, the precept, be charitable, than
any pretended legislator or prophet, who should insert such a maxim in his writings.
Of all expressions, those, which, together with their other meaning, imply a degree
either of blame or approbation, are the least liable to be perverted or mistaken.
It is natural for us to seek a Standard of Taste; a rule, by which the various sentiments
of men may be reconciled; at least, a decision, afforded, confirming one sentiment,
and condemning another.
There is a species of philosophy, which cuts off all hopes of success in such an
attempt, and represents the impossibility of ever attaining any standard of taste. The
difference, it is said, is very wide between judgment and sentiment. All sentiment is
right; because sentiment has a reference to nothing beyond itself, and is always real,
wherever a man is conscious of it. But all determinations of the understanding are not
right; because they have a reference to something beyond themselves, to wit, real
matter of fact; and are not always conformable to that standard. Among a thousand
different opinions which different men may entertain of the same subject, there is one,
and but one, that is just and true; and the only difficulty is to fix and ascertain it. On
the contrary, a thousand different sentiments, excited by the same object, are all right:
Because no sentiment represents what is really in the object. It only marks a certain
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 143 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
conformity or relation between the object and the organs or faculties of the mind; and
if that conformity did not really exist, the sentiment could never possibly have being.
Beauty is no quality in things themselves: It exists merely in the mind which
contemplates them; and each mind perceives a different beauty. One person may even
perceive deformity, where another is sensible of beauty; and every individual ought to
acquiesce in his own sentiment, without pretending to regulate those of others. To
seek the real beauty, or real deformity, is as fruitless an enquiry, as to pretend to
ascertain the real sweet or real bitter. According to the disposition of the organs, the
same object may be both sweet and bitter; and the proverb has justly determined it to
be fruitless to dispute concerning tastes. It is very natural, and even quite necessary, to
extend this axiom to mental, as well as bodily taste; and thus common sense, which is
so often at variance with philosophy, especially with the sceptical kind, is found, in
one instance at least, to agree in pronouncing the same decision.
But though this axiom, by passing into a proverb, seems to have attained the sanction
of common sense; there is certainly a species of common sense which opposes it, at
least serves to modify and restrain it. Whoever would assert an equality of genius and
elegance between Ogilby4 and Milton, or Bunyan5 and Addison, would be thought to
defend no less an extravagance, than if he had maintained a mole-hill to be as high as
Teneriffe,6 or a pond as extensive as the ocean. Though there may be found persons,
who give the preference to the former authors; no one pays attention to such a taste;
and we pronounce without scruple the sentiment of these pretended critics to be
absurd and ridiculous. The principle of the natural equality of tastes is then totally
forgot, and while we admit it on some occasions, where the objects seem near an
equality, it appears an extravagant paradox, or rather a palpable absurdity, where
objects so disproportioned are compared together.
It is evident that none of the rules of composition are fixed by reasonings a priori, or
can be esteemed abstract conclusions of the understanding, from comparing those
habitudes° and relations of ideas, which are eternal and immutable. Their foundation
is the same with that of all the practical sciences, experience; nor are they any thing
but general observations, concerning what has been universally found to please in all
countries and in all ages. Many of the beauties of poetry and even of eloquence are
founded on falsehood and fiction, on hyperboles, metaphors, and an abuse or
perversion of terms from their natural meaning. To check the sallies of the
imagination, and to reduce every expression to geometrical truth and exactness, would
be the most contrary to the laws of criticism; because it would produce a work, which,
by universal experience, has been found the most insipid and disagreeable. But though
poetry can never submit to exact truth, it must be confined by rules of art, discovered
to the author either by genius or observation. If some negligent or irregular writers
have pleased, they have not pleased by their transgressions of rule or order, but in
spite of these transgressions: They have possessed other beauties, which were
conformable to just criticism; and the force of these beauties has been able to
overpower censure, and give the mind a satisfaction superior to the disgust arising
from the blemishes. Ariosto pleases; but not by his monstrous and improbable
fictions, by his bizarre mixture of the serious and comic styles, by the want of
coherence in his stories, or by the continual interruptions of his narration. He charms
by the force and clearness of his expression, by the readiness and variety of his
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 144 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
inventions, and by his natural pictures of the passions, especially those of the gay and
amorous kind: And however his faults may diminish our satisfaction, they are not able
entirely to destroy it. Did our pleasure really arise from those parts of his poem, which
we denominate faults, this would be no objection to criticism in general: It would only
be an objection to those particular rules of criticism, which would establish such
circumstances to be faults, and would represent them as universally blameable. If they
are found to please, they cannot be faults; let the pleasure, which they produce, be
ever so unexpected and unaccountable.
But though all the general rules of art are founded only on experience and on the
observation of the common sentiments of human nature, we must not imagine, that,
on every occasion, the feelings of men will be conformable to these rules. Those finer
emotions of the mind are of a very tender and delicate nature, and require the
concurrence of many favourable circumstances to make them play with facility and
exactness, according to their general and established principles. The least exterior
hindrance to such small springs, or the least internal disorder, disturbs their motion,
and confounds the operation of the whole machine. When we would make an
experiment of this nature, and would try the force of any beauty or deformity, we
must choose with care a proper time and place, and bring the fancy to a suitable
situation and disposition. A perfect serenity of mind, a recollection of thought, a due
attention to the object; if any of these circumstances be wanting, our experiment will
be fallacious, and we shall be unable to judge of the catholic and universal beauty.
The relation, which nature has placed between the form and the sentiment, will at
least be more obscure; and it will require greater accuracy to trace and discern it. We
shall be able to ascertain its influence not so much from the operation of each
particular beauty, as from the durable admiration, which attends those works, that
have survived all the caprices of mode and fashion, all the mistakes of ignorance and
envy.
The same Homer, who pleased at Athens and Rome two thousand years ago, is still
admired at Paris and at London. All the changes of climate, government, religion, and
language, have not been able to obscure his glory. Authority or prejudice may give a
temporary vogue to a bad poet or orator; but his reputation will never be durable or
general. When his compositions are examined by posterity or by foreigners, the
enchantment is dissipated, and his faults appear in their true colours. On the contrary,
a real genius, the longer his works endure, and the more wide they are spread, the
more sincere is the admiration which he meets with. Envy and jealousy have too
much place in a narrow circle; and even familiar acquaintance with his person may
diminish the applause due to his performances: But when these obstructions are
removed, the beauties, which are naturally fitted to excite agreeable sentiments,
immediately display their energy; and while the world endures, they maintain their
authority over the minds of men.
It appears then, that, amidst all the variety and caprice of taste, there are certain
general principles of approbation or blame, whose influence a careful eye may trace in
all operations of the mind. Some particular forms or qualities, from the original
structure of the internal fabric, are calculated to please, and others to displease; and if
they fail of their effect in any particular instance, it is from some apparent defect or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 145 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
imperfection in the organ. A man in a fever would not insist on his palate as able to
decide concerning flavours; nor would one, affected with the jaundice, pretend to give
a verdict with regard to colours. In each creature, there is a sound and a defective
state; and the former alone can be supposed to afford us a true standard of taste and
sentiment. If, in the sound state of the organ, there be an entire or a considerable
uniformity of sentiment among men, we may thence derive an idea of the perfect
beauty; in like manner as the appearance of objects in day-light, to the eye of a man in
health, is denominated their true and real colour, even while colour is allowed to be
merely a phantasm of the senses.
Many and frequent are the defects in the internal organs, which prevent or weaken the
influence of those general principles, on which depends our sentiment of beauty or
deformity. Though some objects, by the structure of the mind, be naturally calculated
to give pleasure, it is not to be expected, that in every individual the pleasure will be
equally felt. Particular incidents and situations occur, which either throw a false light
on the objects, or hinder the true from conveying to the imagination the proper
sentiment and perception.
One obvious cause, why many feel not the proper sentiment of beauty, is the want of
that delicacy of imagination, which is requisite to convey a sensibility of those finer
emotions. This delicacy every one pretends to: Every one talks of it; and would
reduce every kind of taste or sentiment to its standard. But as our intention in this
essay is to mingle some light of the understanding with the feelings of sentiment, it
will be proper to give a more accurate definition of delicacy, than has hitherto been
attempted. And not to draw our philosophy from too profound a source, we shall have
recourse to a noted story in Don Quixote.7
It is with good reason, says Sancho to the squire with the great nose, that I pretend to
have a judgment in wine: This is a quality hereditary in our family. Two of my
kinsmen were once called to give their opinion of a hogshead, which was supposed to
be excellent, being old and of a good vintage. One of them tastes it; considers it; and
after mature reflection pronounces the wine to be good, were it not for a small taste of
leather, which he perceived in it. The other, after using the same precautions, gives
also his verdict in favour of the wine; but with the reserve of a taste of iron, which he
could easily distinguish. You cannot imagine how much they were both ridiculed for
their judgment. But who laughed in the end? On emptying the hogshead, there was
found at the bottom, an old key with a leathern thong tied to it.
The great resemblance between mental and bodily taste will easily teach us to apply
this story. Though it be certain, that beauty and deformity, more than sweet and bitter,
are not qualities in objects, but belong entirely to the sentiment, internal or external; it
must be allowed, that there are certain qualities in objects, which are fitted by nature
to produce those particular feelings. Now as these qualities may be found in a small
degree, or may be mixed and confounded with each other, it often happens, that the
taste is not affected with such minute qualities, or is not able to distinguish all the
particular flavours, amidst the disorder, in which they are presented. Where the organs
are so fine, as to allow nothing to escape them; and at the same time so exact as to
perceive every ingredient in the composition: This we call delicacy of taste, whether
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 146 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
we employ these terms in the literal or metaphorical sense. Here then the general rules
of beauty are of use; being drawn from established models, and from the observation
of what pleases or displeases, when presented singly and in a high degree: And if the
same qualities, in a continued composition and in a smaller degree, affect not the
organs with a sensible delight or uneasiness, we exclude the person from all
pretensions to this delicacy. To produce these general rules or avowed patterns of
composition is like finding the key with the leathern thong; which justified the verdict
of Sancho’s kinsmen, and confounded those pretended judges who had condemned
them. Though the hogshead had never been emptied, the taste of the one was still
equally delicate, and that of the other equally dull and languid: But it would have been
more difficult to have proved the superiority of the former, to the conviction of every
by-stander. In like manner, though the beauties of writing had never been methodized,
or reduced to general principles; though no excellent models had ever been
acknowledged; the different degrees of taste would still have subsisted, and the
judgment of one man been preferable to that of another; but it would not have been so
easy to silence the bad critic, who might always insist upon his particular sentiment,
and refuse to submit to his antagonist. But when we show him an avowed principle of
art; when we illustrate this principle by examples, whose operation, from his own
particular taste, he acknowledges to be conformable to the principle; when we prove,
that the same principle may be applied to the present case, where he did not perceive
or feel its influence: He must conclude, upon the whole, that the fault lies in himself,
and that he wants the delicacy, which is requisite to make him sensible of every
beauty and every blemish, in any composition or discourse.
It is acknowledged to be the perfection of every sense or faculty, to perceive with
exactness its most minute objects, and allow nothing to escape its notice and
observation. The smaller the objects are, which become sensible to the eye, the finer
is that organ, and the more elaborate its make and composition. A good palate is not
tried by strong flavours; but by a mixture of small ingredients, where we are still
sensible of each part, notwithstanding its minuteness and its confusion with the rest.
In like manner, a quick and acute perception of beauty and deformity must be the
perfection of our mental taste; nor can a man be satisfied with himself while he
suspects, that any excellence or blemish in a discourse has passed him unobserved. In
this case, the perfection of the man, and the perfection of the sense or feeling, are
found to be united. A very delicate palate, on many occasions, may be a great
inconvenience both to a man himself and to his friends: But a delicate taste of wit or
beauty must always be a desirable quality; because it is the source of all the finest and
most innocent enjoyments, of which human nature is susceptible. In this decision the
sentiments of all mankind are agreed. Wherever you can ascertain a delicacy of taste,
it is sure to meet with approbation; and the best way of ascertaining it is to appeal to
those models and principles, which have been established by the uniform consent and
experience of nations and ages.
But though there be naturally a wide difference in point of delicacy between one
person and another, nothing tends further to encrease and improve this talent, than
practice in a particular art, and the frequent survey or contemplation of a particular
species of beauty. When objects of any kind are first presented to the eye or
imagination, the sentiment, which attends them, is obscure and confused; and the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 147 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
mind is, in a great measure, incapable of pronouncing concerning their merits or
defects. The taste cannot perceive the several excellencies of the performance; much
less distinguish the particular character of each excellency, and ascertain its quality
and degree. If it pronounce the whole in general to be beautiful or deformed, it is the
utmost that can be expected; and even this judgment, a person, so unpractised, will be
apt to deliver with great hesitation and reserve. But allow him to acquire experience in
those objects, his feeling becomes more exact and nice: He not only perceives the
beauties and defects of each part, but marks the distinguishing species of each quality,
and assigns it suitable praise or blame. A clear and distinct sentiment attends him
through the whole survey of the objects; and he discerns that very degree and kind of
approbation or displeasure, which each part is naturally fitted to produce. The mist
dissipates, which seemed formerly to hang over the object: The organ acquires greater
perfection in its operations; and can pronounce, without danger of mistake,
concerning the merits of every performance. In a word, the same address and
dexterity, which practice gives to the execution of any work, is also acquired by the
same means, in the judging of it.
So advantageous is practice to the discernment of beauty, that, before we can give
judgment on any work of importance, it will even be requisite, that that very
individual performance be more than once perused by us, and be surveyed in different
lights with attention and deliberation. There is a flutter or hurry of thought which
attends the first perusal of any piece, and which confounds the genuine sentiment of
beauty. The relation of the parts is not discerned: The true characters of style are little
distinguished: The several perfections and defects seem wrapped up in a species of
confusion, and present themselves indistinctly to the imagination. Not to mention, that
there is a species of beauty, which, as it is florid° and superficial, pleases at first; but
being found incompatible with a just expression either of reason or passion, soon
palls° upon the taste, and is then rejected with disdain, at least rated at a much lower
value.
It is impossible to continue in the practice of contemplating any order of beauty,
without being frequently obliged to form comparisons between the several species
and degrees of excellence, and estimating their proportion to each other. A man, who
has had no opportunity of comparing the different kinds of beauty, is indeed totally
unqualified to pronounce an opinion with regard to any object presented to him. By
comparison alone we fix the epithets of praise or blame, and learn how to assign the
due degree of each. The coarsest daubing contains a certain lustre of colours and
exactness of imitation, which are so far beauties, and would affect the mind of a
peasant or Indian with the highest admiration. The most vulgar ballads are not entirely
destitute of harmony or nature; and none but a person, familiarized to superior
beauties, would pronounce their numbers harsh, or narration uninteresting. A great
inferiority of beauty gives pain to a person conversant in the highest excellence of the
kind, and is for that reason pronounced a deformity: As the most finished object, with
which we are acquainted, is naturally supposed to have reached the pinnacle of
perfection, and to be entitled to the highest applause. One accustomed to see, and
examine, and weigh the several performances, admired in different ages and nations,
can alone rate the merits of a work exhibited to his view, and assign its proper rank
among the productions of genius.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 148 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
But to enable a critic the more fully to execute this undertaking, he must preserve his
mind free from all prejudice, and allow nothing to enter into his consideration, but the
very object which is submitted to his examination. We may observe, that every work
of art, in order to produce its due effect on the mind, must be surveyed in a certain
point of view, and cannot be fully relished by persons, whose situation, real or
imaginary, is not conformable to that which is required by the performance. An orator
addresses himself to a particular audience, and must have a regard to their particular
genius, interests, opinions, passions, and prejudices; otherwise he hopes in vain to
govern their resolutions, and inflame their affections. Should they even have
entertained some prepossessions against him, however unreasonable, he must not
overlook this disadvantage; but, before he enters upon the subject, must endeavour to
conciliate their affection, and acquire their good graces. A critic of a different age or
nation, who should peruse this discourse, must have all these circumstances in his eye,
and must place himself in the same situation as the audience, in order to form a true
judgment of the oration. In like manner, when any work is addressed to the public,
though I should have a friendship or enmity with the author, I must depart from this
situation; and considering myself as a man in general, forget, if possible, my
individual being and my peculiar circumstances. A person influenced by prejudice,
complies not with this condition; but obstinately maintains his natural position,
without placing himself in that point of view, which the performance supposes. If the
work be addressed to persons of a different age or nation, he makes no allowance for
their peculiar views and prejudices; but, full of the manners of his own age and
country, rashly condemns what seemed admirable in the eyes of those for whom alone
the discourse was calculated. If the work be executed for the public, he never
sufficiently enlarges his comprehension, or forgets his interest as a friend or enemy,
as a rival or commentator. By this means, his sentiments are perverted; nor have the
same beauties and blemishes the same influence upon him, as if he had imposed a
proper violence on his imagination, and had forgotten himself for a moment. So far
his taste evidently departs from the true standard; and of consequence loses all credit
and authority.
It is well known, that in all questions, submitted to the understanding, prejudice is
destructive of sound judgment, and perverts all operations of the intellectual faculties:
It is no less contrary to good taste; nor has it less influence to corrupt our sentiment of
beauty. It belongs to good sense to check its influence in both cases; and in this
respect, as well as in many others, reason, if not an essential part of taste, is at least
requisite to the operations of this latter faculty. In all the nobler productions of genius,
there is a mutual relation and correspondence of parts; nor can either the beauties or
blemishes be perceived by him, whose thought is not capacious enough to
comprehend all those parts, and compare them with each other, in order to perceive
the consistence and uniformity of the whole. Every work of art has also a certain end
or purpose, for which it is calculated; and is to be deemed more or less perfect, as it is
more or less fitted to attain this end. The object of eloquence is to persuade, of history
to instruct, of poetry to please by means of the passions and the imagination. These
ends we must carry constantly in our view, when we peruse any performance; and we
must be able to judge how far the means employed are adapted to their respective
purposes. Besides, every kind of composition, even the most poetical, is nothing but a
chain of propositions and reasonings; not always, indeed, the justest and most exact,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 149 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
but still plausible and specious,° however disguised by the colouring of the
imagination. The persons introduced in tragedy and epic poetry, must be represented
as reasoning, and thinking, and concluding, and acting, suitably to their character and
circumstances; and without judgment, as well as taste and invention, a poet can never
hope to succeed in so delicate an undertaking. Not to mention, that the same
excellence of faculties which contributes to the improvement of reason, the same
clearness of conception, the same exactness of distinction, the same vivacity of
apprehension, are essential to the operations of true taste, and are its infallible
concomitants. It seldom, or never happens, that a man of sense, who has experience in
any art, cannot judge of its beauty; and it is no less rare to meet with a man who has a
just taste without a sound understanding.
Thus, though the principles of taste be universal, and nearly, if not entirely the same
in all men; yet few are qualified to give judgment on any work of art, or establish their
own sentiment as the standard of beauty. The organs of internal sensation are seldom
so perfect as to allow the general principles their full play, and produce a feeling
correspondent to those principles. They either labour under some defect, or are
vitiated by some disorder; and by that means, excite a sentiment, which may be
pronounced erroneous. When the critic has no delicacy, he judges without any
distinction, and is only affected by the grosser and more palpable qualities of the
object: The finer touches pass unnoticed and disregarded. Where he is not aided by
practice, his verdict is attended with confusion and hesitation. Where no comparison
has been employed, the most frivolous beauties, such as rather merit the name of
defects, are the object of his admiration. Where he lies under the influence of
prejudice, all his natural sentiments are perverted. Where good sense is wanting, he is
not qualified to discern the beauties of design and reasoning, which are the highest
and most excellent. Under some or other of these imperfections, the generality of men
labour; and hence a true judge in the finer arts is observed, even during the most
polished ages, to be so rare a character: Strong sense, united to delicate sentiment,
improved by practice, perfected by comparison, and cleared of all prejudice, can alone
entitle critics to this valuable character; and the joint verdict of such, wherever they
are to be found, is the true standard of taste and beauty.
But where are such critics to be found? By what marks are they to be known? How
distinguish them from pretenders? These questions are embarrassing; and seem to
throw us back into the same uncertainty, from which, during the course of this essay,
we have endeavoured to extricate ourselves.
But if we consider the matter aright, these are questions of fact, not of sentiment.
Whether any particular person be endowed with good sense and a delicate
imagination, free from prejudice, may often be the subject of dispute, and be liable to
great discussion and enquiry: But that such a character is valuable and estimable will
be agreed in by all mankind. Where these doubts occur, men can do no more than in
other disputable questions, which are submitted to the understanding: They must
produce the best arguments, that their invention suggests to them; they must
acknowledge a true and decisive standard to exist somewhere, to wit, real existence
and matter of fact; and they must have indulgence to such as differ from them in their
appeals to this standard. It is sufficient for our present purpose, if we have proved,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 150 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
that the taste of all individuals is not upon an equal footing, and that some men in
general, however difficult to be particularly pitched upon, will be acknowledged by
universal sentiment to have a preference above others.
But in reality the difficulty of finding, even in particulars, the standard of taste, is not
so great as it is represented. Though in speculation, we may readily avow a certain
criterion in science and deny it in sentiment, the matter is found in practice to be
much more hard to ascertain in the former case than in the latter. Theories of abstract
philosophy, systems of profound theology, have prevailed during one age: In a
successive period, these have been universally exploded: Their absurdity has been
detected: Other theories and systems have supplied their place, which again gave
place to their successors: And nothing has been experienced more liable to the
revolutions of chance and fashion than these pretended decisions of science. The case
is not the same with the beauties of eloquence and poetry. Just expressions of passion
and nature are sure, after a little time, to gain public applause, which they maintain for
ever. Aristotle,8 and Plato, and Epicurus,9 and Descartes, may successively yield to
each other: But Terence and Virgil maintain an universal, undisputed empire over the
minds of men. The abstract philosophy of Cicero has lost its credit: The vehemence of
his oratory is still the object of our admiration.
Though men of delicate taste be rare, they are easily to be distinguished in society, by
the soundness of their understanding and the superiority of their faculties above the
rest of mankind. The ascendant, which they acquire, gives a prevalence to that lively
approbation, with which they receive any productions of genius, and renders it
generally predominant. Many men, when left to themselves, have but a faint and
dubious perception of beauty, who yet are capable of relishing any fine stroke, which
is pointed out to them. Every convert to the admiration of the real poet or orator is the
cause of some new conversion. And though prejudices may prevail for a time, they
never unite in celebrating any rival to the true genius, but yield at last to the force of
nature and just sentiment. Thus, though a civilized nation may easily be mistaken in
the choice of their admired philosopher, they never have been found long to err, in
their affection for a favourite epic or tragic author.
But notwithstanding all our endeavours to fix a standard of taste, and reconcile the
discordant apprehensions of men, there still remain two sources of variation, which
are not sufficient indeed to confound all the boundaries of beauty and deformity, but
will often serve to produce a difference in the degrees of our approbation or blame.
The one is the different humours of particular men; the other, the particular manners
and opinions of our age and country. The general principles of taste are uniform in
human nature: Where men vary in their judgments, some defect or perversion in the
faculties may commonly be remarked; proceeding either from prejudice, from want of
practice, or want of delicacy; and there is just reason for approving one taste, and
condemning another. But where there is such a diversity in the internal frame or
external situation as is entirely blameless on both sides, and leaves no room to give
one the preference above the other; in that case a certain degree of diversity in
judgment is unavoidable, and we seek in vain for a standard, by which we can
reconcile the contrary sentiments.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 151 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
A young man, whose passions are warm, will be more sensibly touched with amorous
and tender images, than a man more advanced in years, who takes pleasure in wise,
philosophical reflections concerning the conduct of life and moderation of the
passions. At twenty, Ovid may be the favourite author; Horace at forty; and perhaps
Tacitus at fifty. Vainly would we, in such cases, endeavour to enter into the
sentiments of others, and divest ourselves of those propensities, which are natural to
us. We choose our favourite author as we do our friend, from a conformity of humour
and disposition. Mirth or passion, sentiment or reflection; whichever of these most
predominates in our temper, it gives us a peculiar sympathy with the writer who
resembles us.
One person is more pleased with the sublime; another with the tender; a third with
raillery. One has a strong sensibility to blemishes, and is extremely studious of
correctness: Another has a more lively feeling of beauties, and pardons twenty
absurdities and defects for one elevated or pathetic° stroke. The ear of this man is
entirely turned towards conciseness and energy; that man is delighted with a copious,
rich, and harmonious expression. Simplicity is affected by one; ornament by another.
Comedy, tragedy, satire, odes, have each its partizans, who prefer that particular
species of writing to all others. It is plainly an error in a critic, to confine his
approbation to one species or style of writing, and condemn all the rest. But it is
almost impossible not to feel a predilection for that which suits our particular turn and
disposition. Such preferences are innocent and unavoidable, and can never reasonably
be the object of dispute, because there is no standard, by which they can be decided.
For a like reason, we are more pleased, in the course of our reading, with pictures and
characters, that resemble objects which are found in our own age or country, than with
those which describe a different set of customs. It is not without some effort, that we
reconcile ourselves to the simplicity of ancient manners, and behold princesses
carrying water from the spring, and kings and heroes dressing their own victuals.° We
may allow in general, that the representation of such manners is no fault in the author,
nor deformity in the piece; but we are not so sensibly touched with them. For this
reason, comedy is not easily transferred from one age or nation to another. A
Frenchman or Englishman is not pleased with the Andria of Terence,10 or Clitia of
Machiavel;11 where the fine lady, upon whom all the play turns, never once appears
to the spectators, but is always kept behind the scenes, suitably to the reserved
humour of the ancient Greeks and modern Italians. A man of learning and reflection
can make allowance for these peculiarities of manners; but a common audience can
never divest themselves so far of their usual ideas and sentiments, as to relish pictures
which no wise resemble them.
But here there occurs a reflection, which may, perhaps, be useful in examining the
celebrated controversy concerning ancient and modern learning; where we often find
the one side excusing any seeming absurdity in the ancients from the manners of the
age, and the other refusing to admit this excuse, or at least, admitting it only as an
apology for the author, not for the performance. In my opinion, the proper boundaries
in this subject have seldom been fixed between the contending parties. Where any
innocent peculiarities of manners are represented, such as those above mentioned,
they ought certainly to be admitted; and a man, who is shocked with them, gives an
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 152 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
evident proof of false delicacy and refinement. The poet’s monument more durable
than brass,12 must fall to the ground like common brick or clay, were men to make
no allowance for the continual revolutions of manners and customs, and would admit
of nothing but what was suitable to the prevailing fashion. Must we throw aside the
pictures of our ancestors, because of their ruffs° and fardingales?° But where the ideas
of morality and decency alter from one age to another, and where vicious manners are
described, without being marked with the proper characters of blame and
disapprobation; this must be allowed to disfigure the poem, and to be a real deformity.
I cannot, nor is it proper I should, enter into such sentiments; and however I may
excuse the poet, on account of the manners of his age, I never can relish the
composition. The want of humanity and of decency, so conspicuous in the characters
drawn by several of the ancient poets, even sometimes by Homer and the Greek
tragedians, diminishes considerably the merit of their noble performances, and gives
modern authors an advantage over them. We are not interested in the fortunes and
sentiments of such rough heroes: We are displeased to find the limits of vice and
virtue so much confounded: And whatever indulgence we may give to the writer on
account of his prejudices, we cannot prevail on ourselves to enter into his sentiments,
or bear an affection to characters, which we plainly discover to be blameable.
The case is not the same with moral principles, as with speculative opinions of any
kind. These are in continual flux and revolution. The son embraces a different system
from the father. Nay, there scarcely is any man, who can boast of great constancy and
uniformity in this particular. Whatever speculative errors may be found in the polite
writings of any age or country, they detract but little from the value of those
compositions. There needs but a certain turn of thought or imagination to make us
enter into all the opinions, which then prevailed, and relish the sentiments or
conclusions derived from them. But a very violent effort is requisite to change our
judgment of manners, and excite sentiments of approbation or blame, love or hatred,
different from those to which the mind from long custom has been familiarized. And
where a man is confident of the rectitude of that moral standard, by which he judges,
he is justly jealous of it, and will not pervert the sentiments of his heart for a moment,
in complaisance° to any writer whatsoever.
Of all speculative errors, those, which regard religion, are the most excusable in
compositions of genius; nor is it ever permitted to judge of the civility or wisdom of
any people, or even of single persons, by the grossness or refinement of their
theological principles. The same good sense, that directs men in the ordinary
occurrences of life, is not hearkened to in religious matters, which are supposed to be
placed altogether above the cognizance of human reason. On this account, all the
absurdities of the pagan system of theology must be overlooked by every critic, who
would pretend to form a just notion of ancient poetry; and our posterity, in their turn,
must have the same indulgence to their forefathers. No religious principles can ever
be imputed as a fault to any poet, while they remain merely principles, and take not
such strong possession of his heart, as to lay him under the imputation of bigotry or
superstition. Where that happens, they confound the sentiments of morality, and alter
the natural boundaries of vice and virtue. They are therefore eternal blemishes,
according to the principle abovementioned; nor are the prejudices and false opinions
of the age sufficient to justify them.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 153 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
It is essential to the Roman catholic religion to inspire a violent hatred of every other
worship, and to represent all pagans, mahometans, and heretics as the objects of
divine wrath and vengeance. Such sentiments, though they are in reality very
blameable, are considered as virtues by the zealots of that communion, and are
represented in their tragedies and epic poems as a kind of divine heroism. This bigotry
has disfigured two very fine tragedies of the French theatre, Polieucte and Athalia;13
where an intemperate zeal for particular modes of worship is set off with all the pomp
imaginable, and forms the predominant character of the heroes. “What is this,” says
the sublime Joad to Josabet, finding her in discourse with Mathan, the priest of Baal,
“Does the daughter of David speak to this traitor? Are you not afraid, lest the earth
should open and pour forth flames to devour you both? Or lest these holy walls should
fall and crush you together? What is his purpose? Why comes that enemy of God
hither to poison the air, which we breathe, with his horrid presence?” Such sentiments
are received with great applause on the theatre of Paris; but at London the spectators
would be full as much pleased to hear Achilles tell Agamemnon, that he was a dog in
his forehead, and a deer in his heart, or Jupiter threaten Juno with a sound drubbing, if
she will not be quiet.14
Religious principles are also a blemish in any polite composition, when they rise up to
superstition, and intrude themselves into every sentiment, however remote from any
connection with religion. It is no excuse for the poet, that the customs of his country
had burthened life with so many religious ceremonies and observances, that no part of
it was exempt from that yoke. It must for ever be ridiculous in Petrarch to compare his
mistress, Laura, to Jesus Christ.15 Nor is it less ridiculous in that agreeable libertine,
Boccace, very seriously to give thanks to God Almighty and the ladies, for their
assistance in defending him against his enemies.16
ESSAYS,
MORAL, POLITICAL,
AND
LITERARY.
PART II*
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 154 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
PART II*
ESSAYS MORAL, POLITICAL, AND LITERARY
ESSAY I
OF COMMERCE
The greater part of mankind may be divided into two classes; that of shallow thinkers,
who fall short of the truth; and that of abstruse thinkers, who go beyond it. The latter
class are by far the most rare: and I may add, by far the most useful and valuable.
They suggest hints, at least, and start difficulties, which they want, perhaps, skill to
pursue; but which may produce fine discoveries, when handled by men who have a
more just way of thinking. At worst, what they say is uncommon; and if it should cost
some pains to comprehend it, one has, however, the pleasure of hearing something
that is new. An author is little to be valued, who tells us nothing but what we can learn
from every coffee-house conversation.
All people of shallow thought are apt to decry even those of solid understanding, as
abstruse thinkers, and metaphysicians, and refiners; and never will allow any thing to
be just which is beyond their own weak conceptions. There are some cases, I own,
where an extraordinary refinement affords a strong presumption of falsehood, and
where no reasoning is to be trusted but what is natural and easy. When a man
deliberates concerning his conduct in any particular affair, and forms schemes in
politics, trade, œconomy, or any business in life, he never ought to draw his
arguments too fine, or connect too long a chain of consequences together. Something
is sure to happen, that will disconcert his reasoning, and produce an event different
from what he expected. But when we reason upon general subjects, one may justly
affirm, that our speculations can scarcely ever be too fine, provided they be just; and
that the difference between a common man and a man of genius is chiefly seen in the
shallowness or depth of the principles upon which they proceed. General reasonings
seem intricate, merely because they are general; nor is it easy for the bulk of mankind
to distinguish, in a great number of particulars, that common circumstance in which
they all agree, or to extract it, pure and unmixed, from the other superfluous
circumstances. Every judgment or conclusion, with them, is particular. They cannot
enlarge their view to those universal propositions, which comprehend under them an
infinite number of individuals, and include a whole science in a single theorem. Their
eye is confounded with such an extensive prospect; and the conclusions, derived from
it, even though clearly expressed, seem intricate and obscure. But however intricate
they may seem, it is certain, that general principles, if just and sound, must always
prevail in the general course of things, though they may fail in particular cases; and it
is the chief business of philosophers to regard the general course of things. I may add,
that it is also the chief business of politicians; especially in the domestic government
of the state, where the public good, which is, or ought to be their object, depends on
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 155 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the concurrence of a multitude of causes;1 not, as in foreign politics, on accidents and
chances, and the caprices of a few persons. This therefore makes the difference
between particular deliberations and general reasonings, and renders subtilty and
refinement much more suitable to the latter than to the former.
I thought this introduction necessary before the following discourses on commerce,
money, interest, balance of trade, &c.a where, perhaps, there will occur some
principles which are uncommon, and which may seem too refined and subtile for such
vulgar subjects. If false, let them be rejected: But no one ought to entertain a prejudice
against them, merely because they are out of the common road.
The greatness of a state, and the happiness of its subjects, how independent soever
they may be supposed in some respects, are commonly allowed to be inseparable with
regard to commerce; and as private men receive greater security, in the possession of
their trade and riches, from the power of the public, so the public becomes powerful
in proportion to the opulence and extensive commerce of private men. This maxim is
true in general; though I cannot forbear thinking, that it may possibly admit of
exceptions, and that we often establish it with too little reserve and limitation. There
may be some circumstances, where the commerce and riches and luxury of
individuals, instead of adding strength to the public, will serve only to thin its armies,
and diminish its authority among the neighbouring nations. Man is a very variable
being, and susceptible of many different opinions, principles, and rules of conduct.
What may be true, while he adheres to one way of thinking, will be found false, when
he has embraced an opposite set of manners and opinions.
The bulk of every state may be divided into husbandmen and manufacturers. The
former are employed in the culture of the land; the latter work up the materials
furnished by the former, into all the commodities which are necessary or ornamental
to human life. As soon as men quit their savage state, where they live chiefly by
hunting and fishing, they must fall into these two classes; though the arts of
agriculture employ at first the most numerous part of the society.2 Time and
experience improve so much these arts, that the land may easily maintain a much
greater number of men, than those who are immediately employed in its culture, or
who furnish the more necessary manufactures to such as are so employed.
If these superfluous hands apply themselves to the finer arts, which are commonly
denominated the arts of luxury, they add to the happiness of the state; since they
afford to many the opportunity of receiving enjoyments, with which they would
otherwise have been unacquainted. But may not another scheme be proposed for the
employment of these superfluous hands? May not the sovereign lay claim to them,
and employ them in fleets and armies, to encrease the dominions of the state abroad,
and spread its fame over distant nations? It is certain that the fewer desires and wants
are found in the proprietors and labourers of land, the fewer hands do they employ;
and consequently the superfluities of the land, instead of maintaining tradesmen and
manufacturers, may support fleets and armies to a much greater extent, than where a
great many arts are required to minister to the luxury of particular persons. Here
therefore seems to be a kind of opposition between the greatness of the state and the
happiness of the subject. A state is never greater than when all its superfluous hands
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 156 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
are employed in the service of the public. The ease and convenience of private
persons require, that these hands should be employed in their service. The one can
never be satisfied, but at the expence of the other. As the ambition of the sovereign
must entrench on° the luxury of individuals; so the luxury of individuals must
diminish the force, and check the ambition of the sovereign.
Nor is this reasoning merely chimerical; but is founded on history and experience.
The republic of Sparta was certainly more powerful than any state now in the world,
consisting of an equal number of people; and this was owing entirely to the want of
commerce and luxury. The Helotes were the labourers: The Spartans were the soldiers
or gentlemen. It is evident, that the labour of the Helotes could not have maintained so
great a number of Spartans, had these latter lived in ease and delicacy, and given
employment to a great variety of trades and manufactures. The like policy may be
remarked in Rome. And indeed, throughout all ancient history, it is observable, that
the smallest republics raised and maintained greater armies, than states consisting of
triple the number of inhabitants, are able to support at present. It is computed, that, in
all European nations, the proportion between soldiers and people does not exceed one
to a hundred. But we read, that the city of Rome alone, with its small territory, raised
and maintained, in early times, ten legions against the Latins.3Athens, the whole of
whose dominions was not larger than Yorkshire, sent to the expedition against Sicily
near forty thousand men.4Dionysius the elder, it is said, maintained a standing army
of a hundred thousand foot and ten thousand horse, besides a large fleet of four
hundred sail;5 though his territories extended no farther than the city of Syracuse,
about a third of the island of Sicily, and some sea-port towns and garrisons on the
coast of Italy and Illyricum.6 It is true, the ancient armies, in time of war, subsisted
much upon plunder: But did not the enemy plunder in their turn? which was a more
ruinous way of levying a tax, than any other that could be devised. In short, no
probable reason can be assigned for the great power of the more ancient states above
the modern, but their want of commerce and luxury. Few artizans were maintained by
the labour of the farmers, and therefore more soldiers might live upon it. Livy says,
that Rome, in his time, would find it difficult to raise as large an army as that which,
in her early days, she sent out against the Gauls and Latins.7 Instead of those soldiers
who fought for liberty and empire in Camillus’s time, there were, in Augustus’s days,
musicians, painters, cooks, players, and tailors; and if the land was equally cultivated
at both periods, it could certainly maintain equal numbers in the one profession as in
the other. They added nothing to the mere necessaries of life, in the latter period more
than in the former.
It is natural on this occasion to ask, whether sovereigns may not return to the maxims
of ancient policy, and consult their own interest in this respect, more than the
happiness of their subjects? I answer, that it appears to me, almost impossible; and
that because ancient policy was violent, and contrary to the more natural and usual
course of things. It is well known with what peculiar laws Sparta was governed, and
what a prodigy that republic is justly esteemed by every one, who has considered
human nature as it has displayed itself in other nations, and other ages. Were the
testimony of history less positive and circumstantial,° such a government would
appear a mere philosophical whim or fiction, and impossible ever to be reduced to
practice. And though the Roman and other ancient republics were supported on
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 157 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
principles somewhat more natural, yet was there an extraordinary concurrence of
circumstances to make them submit to such grievous burthens.° They were free states;
they were small ones; and the age being martial, all their neighbours were continually
in arms. Freedom naturally begets public spirit, especially in small states; and this
public spirit, this amor patriæ,° must encrease, when the public is almost in continual
alarm, and men are obliged, every moment, to expose themselves to the greatest
dangers for its defence. A continual succession of wars makes every citizen a soldier:
He takes the field in his turn: And during his service he is chiefly maintained by
himself. This service is indeed equivalent to a heavy tax; yet is it less felt by a people
addicted to arms, who fight for honour and revenge more than pay, and are
unacquainted with gain and industry as well as pleasure.8 Not to mention the great
equality of fortunes among the inhabitants of the ancient republics, where every field,
belonging to a different proprietor, was able to maintain a family, and rendered the
numbers of citizens very considerable, even without trade and manufactures.
But though the want of trade and manufactures, among a free and very martial people,
may sometimes have no other effect than to render the public more powerful, it is
certain, that, in the common course of human affairs, it will have a quite contrary
tendency. Sovereigns must take mankind as they find them, and cannot pretend to
introduce any violent change in their principles and ways of thinking. A long course
of time, with a variety of accidents and circumstances, are requisite to produce those
great revolutions, which so much diversify the face of human affairs. And the less
natural any set of principles are, which support a particular society, the more
difficulty will a legislator meet with in raising and cultivating them. It is his best
policy to comply with the common bent of mankind, and give it all the improvements
of which it is susceptible. Now, according to the most natural course of things,
industry and arts and trade encrease the power of the sovereign as well as the
happiness of the subjects; and that policy is violent, which aggrandizes the public by
the poverty of individuals. This will easily appear from a few considerations, which
will present to us the consequences of sloth and barbarity.
Where manufactures and mechanic arts are not cultivated, the bulk of the people must
apply themselves to agriculture; and if their skill and industry encrease, there must
arise a great superfluity from their labour beyond what suffices to maintain them.
They have no temptation, therefore, to encrease their skill and industry; since they
cannot exchange that superfluity for any commodities, which may serve either to their
pleasure or vanity. A habit of indolence naturally prevails. The greater part of the land
lies uncultivated. What is cultivated, yields not its utmost for want of skill and
assiduity in the farmers. If at any time the public exigencies require, that great
numbers should be employed in the public service, the labour of the people furnishes
now no superfluities, by which these numbers can be maintained. The labourers
cannot encrease their skill and industry on a sudden.° Lands uncultivated cannot be
brought into tillage for some years. The armies, mean while, must either make sudden
and violent conquests, or disband for want of subsistence. A regular attack or defence,
therefore, is not to be expected from such a people, and their soldiers must be as
ignorant and unskilful as their farmers and manufacturers.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 158 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Every thing in the world is purchased by labour; and our passions are the only causes
of labour. When a nation abounds in manufactures and mechanic arts, the proprietors
of land, as well as the farmers, study agriculture as a science, and redouble their
industry and attention. The superfluity, which arises from their labour, is not lost; but
is exchanged with manufactures for those commodities, which men’s luxury now
makes them covet. By this means, land furnishes a great deal more of the necessaries
of life, than what suffices for those who cultivate it. In times of peace and tranquillity,
this superfluity goes to the maintenance of manufacturers, and the improvers of liberal
arts. But it is easy for the public to convert many of these manufacturers into soldiers,
and maintain them by that superfluity, which arises from the labour of the farmers.
Accordingly we find, that this is the case in all civilized governments. When the
sovereign raises an army, what is the consequence? He imposes a tax. This tax obliges
all the people to retrench° what is least necessary to their subsistence. Those, who
labour in such commodities, must either enlist in the troops, or turn themselves to
agriculture, and thereby oblige some labourers to enlist for want of business. And to
consider the matter abstractedly, manufactures encrease the power of the state only as
they store up so much labour, and that of a kind to which the public may lay claim,
without depriving any one of the necessaries of life. The more labour, therefore, is
employed beyond mere necessaries, the more powerful is any state; since the persons
engaged in that labour may easily be converted to the public service. In a state without
manufactures, there may be the same number of hands; but there is not the same
quantity of labour, nor of the same kind. All the labour is there bestowed upon
necessaries, which can admit of little or no abatement.°
Thus the greatness of the sovereign and the happiness of the state are, in a great
measure, united with regard to trade and manufactures. It is a violent method, and in
most cases impracticable, to oblige the labourer to toil, in order to raise from the land
more than what subsists himself and family. Furnish him with manufactures and
commodities, and he will do it of himself. Afterwards you will find it easy to seize
some part of his superfluous labour, and employ it in the public service, without
giving him his wonted° return. Being accustomed to industry, he will think this less
grievous, than if, at once, you obliged him to an augmentation of labour without any
reward. The case is the same with regard to the other members of the state. The
greater is the stock of labour of all kinds, the greater quantity may be taken from the
heap, without making any sensible alteration in it.
A public granary of corn, a storehouse of cloth, a magazine of arms; all these must be
allowed real riches and strength in any state. Trade and industry are really nothing but
a stock of labour, which, in times of peace and tranquillity, is employed for the ease
and satisfaction of individuals; but in the exigencies of state, may, in part, be turned to
public advantage. Could we convert a city into a kind of fortified camp, and infuse
into each breast so martial a genius, and such a passion for public good, as to make
every one willing to undergo the greatest hardships for the sake of the public; these
affections might now, as in ancient times, prove alone a sufficient spur to industry,
and support the community. It would then be advantageous, as in camps, to banish all
arts and luxury; and, by restrictions on equipage and tables, make the provisions and
forage last longer than if the army were loaded with a number of superfluous
retainers. But as these principles are too disinterested and too difficult to support, it is
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 159 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
requisite to govern men by other passions, and animate them with a spirit of avarice
and industry, art and luxury. The camp is, in this case, loaded with a superfluous
retinue; but the provisions flow in proportionably larger. The harmony of the whole is
still supported; and the natural bent of the mind being more complied with,
individuals, as well as the public, find their account in the observance of those
maxims.
The same method of reasoning will let us see the advantage of foreign commerce, in
augmenting the power of the state, as well as the riches and happiness of the subject.
It encreases the stock of labour in the nation; and the sovereign may convert what
share of it he finds necessary to the service of the public. Foreign trade, by its imports,
furnishes materials for new manufactures; and by its exports, it produces labour in
particular commodities, which could not be consumed at home. In short, a kingdom,
that has a large import and export, must abound more with industry, and that
employed upon delicacies and luxuries, than a kingdom which rests contented with its
native commodities. It is, therefore, more powerful, as well as richer and happier. The
individuals reap the benefit of these commodities, so far as they gratify the senses and
appetites. And the public is also a gainer, while a greater stock of labour is, by this
means, stored up against any public exigency; that is, a greater number of laborious
men are maintained, who may be diverted to the public service, without robbing any
one of the necessaries, or even the chief conveniencies of life.
If we consult history, we shall find, that, in most nations, foreign trade has preceded
any refinement in home manufactures, and given birth to domestic luxury. The
temptation is stronger to make use of foreign commodities, which are ready for use,
and which are entirely new to us, than to make improvements on any domestic
commodity, which always advance by slow degrees, and never affect us by their
novelty. The profit is also very great, in exporting what is superfluous at home, and
what bears no price, to foreign nations, whose soil or climate is not favourable to that
commodity. Thus men become acquainted with the pleasures of luxury and the profits
of commerce; and their delicacy and industry, being once awakened, carry them on to
farther improvements, in every branch of domestic as well as foreign trade. And this
perhaps is the chief advantage which arises from a commerce with strangers. It rouses
men from their indolence; and presenting the gayer and more opulent part of the
nation with objects of luxury, which they never before dreamed of, raises in them a
desire of a more splendid way of life than what their ancestors enjoyed. And at the
same time, the few merchants, who possess the secret of this importation and
exportation, make great profits; and becoming rivals in wealth to the ancient nobility,
tempt other adventurers to become their rivals in commerce. Imitation soon diffuses
all those arts; while domestic manufactures emulate the foreign in their
improvements, and work up every home commodity to the utmost perfection of which
it is susceptible. Their own steel and iron, in such laborious hands, become equal to
the gold and rubies of the Indies.
When the affairs of the society are once brought to this situation, a nation may lose
most of its foreign trade, and yet continue a great and powerful people. If strangers
will not take any particular commodity of ours, we must cease to labour in it. The
same hands will turn themselves towards some refinement in other commodities,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 160 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
which may be wanted at home. And there must always be materials for them to work
upon; till every person in the state, who possesses riches, enjoys as great plenty of
home commodities, and those in as great perfection, as he desires; which can never
possibly happen. China is represented as one of the most flourishing empires in the
world; though it has very little commerce beyond its own territories.
It will not, I hope, be considered as a superfluous digression, if I here observe, that, as
the multitude of mechanical arts is advantageous, so is the great number of persons to
whose share the productions of these arts fall. A too great disproportion among the
citizens weakens any state. Every person, if possible, ought to enjoy the fruits of his
labour, in a full possession of all the necessaries, and many of the conveniencies of
life. No one can doubt, but such an equality is most suitable to human nature, and
diminishes much less from the happiness of the rich than it adds to that of the poor. It
also augments the power of the state, and makes any extraordinary taxes or
impositions be paid with more chearfulness. Where the riches are engrossed° by a
few, these must contribute very largely to the supplying of the public necessities. But
when the riches are dispersed among multitudes, the burthen feels light on every
shoulder, and the taxes make not a very sensible difference on any one’s way of
living.
Add to this, that, where the riches are in few hands, these must enjoy all the power,
and will readily conspire to lay the whole burthen on the poor, and oppress them still
farther, to the discouragement of all industry.
In this circumstance consists the great advantage of England above any nation at
present in the world, or that appears in the records of any story. It is true, the English
feel some disadvantages in foreign trade by the high price of labour, which is in part
the effect of the riches of their artisans, as well as of the plenty of money: But as
foreign trade is not the most material circumstance, it is not to be put in competition
with the happiness of so many millions. And if there were no more to endear to them
that free government under which they live, this alone were sufficient. The poverty of
the common people is a natural, if not an infallible effect of absolute monarchy;
though I doubt, whether it be always true, on the other hand, that their riches are an
infallible result of liberty. Liberty must be attended with particular accidents, and a
certain turn of thinking, in order to produce that effect. Lord Bacon, accounting for
the great advantages obtained by the English in their wars with France, ascribes them
chiefly to the superior ease and plenty of the common people amongst the former; yet
the government of the two kingdoms was, at that time, pretty much alike.9 Where the
labourers and artisans are accustomed to work for low wages, and to retain but a small
part of the fruits of their labour, it is difficult for them, even in a free government, to
better their condition, or conspire among themselves to heighten their wages. But
even where they are accustomed to a more plentiful way of life, it is easy for the rich,
in an arbitrary government, to conspire against them, and throw the whole burthen of
the taxes on their shoulders.
It may seem an odd position, that the poverty of the common people in France, Italy,
and Spain, is, in some measure, owing to the superior riches of the soil and happiness
of the climate; yet there want not reasons to justify this paradox. In such a fine mould
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 161 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
or soil as that of those more southern regions, agriculture is an easy art; and one man,
with a couple of sorry° horses, will be able, in a season, to cultivate as much land as
will pay a pretty considerable rent to the proprietor. All the art, which the farmer
knows, is to leave his ground fallow° for a year, as soon as it is exhausted; and the
warmth of the sun alone and temperature of the climate enrich it, and restore its
fertility. Such poor peasants, therefore, require only a simple maintenance for their
labour. They have no stock or riches, which claim more; and at the same time, they
are for ever dependant on their landlord, who gives no leases, nor fears that his land
will be spoiled by the ill methods of cultivation. In England, the land is rich, but
coarse; must be cultivated at a great expence; and produces slender crops, when not
carefully managed, and by a method which gives not the full profit but in a course of
several years. A farmer, therefore, in England must have a considerable stock, and a
long lease; which beget proportional profits. The fine vineyards of Champagne and
Burgundy,10 that often yield to the landlord above five pounds per acre, are
cultivated by peasants, who have scarcely bread: The reason is, that such peasants
need no stock but their own limbs, with instruments of husbandry, which they can buy
for twenty shillings. The farmers are commonly in some better circumstances in those
countries. But the grasiers° are most at their ease of all those who cultivate the land.
The reason is still the same. Men must have profits proportionable to their expence
and hazard. Where so considerable a number of the labouring poor as the peasants and
farmers are in very low circumstances, all the rest must partake of their poverty,
whether the government of that nation be monarchical or republican.
We may form a similar remark with regard to the general history of mankind. What is
the reason, why no people, living between the tropics, could ever yet attain to any art
or civility, or reach even any police° in their government, and any military discipline;
while few nations in the temperate climates have been altogether deprived of these
advantages? It is probable that one cause of this phænomenon is the warmth and
equality of weather in the torrid zone, which render clothes and houses less requisite
for the inhabitants, and thereby remove, in part, that necessity, which is the great spur
to industry and invention. Curis acuens mortalia corda.11 Not to mention, that the
fewer goods or possessions of this kind any people enjoy, the fewer quarrels are likely
to arise amongst them, and the less necessity will there be for a settled police or
regular authority to protect and defend them from foreign enemies, or from each
other.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 162 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY II
OF REFINEMENT IN THE ARTSA
Luxury is a word of an uncertain signification, and may be taken in a good as well as
in a bad sense. In general, it means great refinement in the gratification of the senses;
and any degree of it may be innocent or blameable, according to the age, or country,
or condition of the person. The bounds between the virtue and the vice cannot here be
exactly fixed, more than in other moral subjects. To imagine, that the gratifying of
any sense, or the indulging of any delicacy in meat, drink, or apparel, is of itself a
vice, can never enter into a head, that is not disordered by the frenzies of enthusiasm.
I have, indeed, heard of a monk abroad, who, because the windows of his cell opened
upon a noble prospect, made a covenant with his eyes never to turn that way, or
receive so sensual a gratification. And such is the crime of drinking Champagne or
Burgundy, preferably to small beer or porter.° These indulgences are only vices, when
they are pursued at the expence of some virtue, as liberality or charity; in like manner
as they are follies, when for them a man ruins his fortune, and reduces himself to want
and beggary. Where they entrench upon no virtue, but leave ample subject° whence to
provide for friends, family, and every proper object of generosity or compassion, they
are entirely innocent, and have in every age been acknowledged such by almost all
moralists. To be entirely occupied with the luxury of the table, for instance, without
any relish for the pleasures of ambition, study, or conversation, is a mark of stupidity,
and is incompatible with any vigour of temper or genius. To confine one’s expence°
entirely to such a gratification, without regard to friends or family, is an indication of
a heart destitute of humanity or benevolence. But if a man reserve time sufficient for
all laudable pursuits, and money sufficient for all generous purposes, he is free from
every shadow of blame or reproach.
Since luxury may be considered either as innocent or blameable, one may be
surprized at those preposterous opinions, which have been entertained concerning it;
while men of libertine° principles bestow praises even on vicious luxury, and
represent it as highly advantageous to society; and on the other hand, men of severe
morals blame even the most innocent luxury, and represent it as the source of all the
corruptions, disorders, and factions, incident to civil government. We shall here
endeavour to correct both these extremes, by proving, first, that the ages of refinement
are both the happiest and most virtuous; secondly, that wherever luxury ceases to be
innocent, it also ceases to be beneficial; and when carried a degree too far, is a quality
pernicious, though perhaps not the most pernicious, to political society.
To prove the first point, we need but consider the effects of refinement both on
private and on public life. Human happiness, according to the most received notions,
seems to consist in three ingredients; action, pleasure, and indolence: And though
these ingredients ought to be mixed in different proportions, according to the
particular disposition of the person; yet no one ingredient can be entirely wanting,
without destroying, in some measure, the relish of the whole composition. Indolence
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 163 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
or repose, indeed, seems not of itself to contribute much to our enjoyment; but, like
sleep, is requisite as an indulgence to the weakness of human nature, which cannot
support an uninterrupted course of business or pleasure. That quick march of the
spirits, which takes a man from himself, and chiefly gives satisfaction, does in the end
exhaust the mind, and requires some intervals of repose, which, though agreeable for
a moment, yet, if prolonged, beget a languor and lethargy, that destroys all enjoyment.
Education, custom, and example, have a mighty influence in turning the mind to any
of these pursuits; and it must be owned, that, where they promote a relish for action
and pleasure, they are so far favourable to human happiness. In times when industry
and the arts flourish, men are kept in perpetual occupation, and enjoy, as their reward,
the occupation itself, as well as those pleasures which are the fruit of their labour. The
mind acquires new vigour; enlarges its powers and faculties; and by an assiduity in
honest industry, both satisfies its natural appetites, and prevents the growth of
unnatural ones, which commonly spring up, when nourished by ease and idleness.
Banish those arts from society, you deprive men both of action and of pleasure; and
leaving nothing but indolence in their place, you even destroy the relish of indolence,
which never is agreeable, but when it succeeds to labour, and recruits° the spirits,
exhausted by too much application and fatigue.
Another advantage of industry and of refinements in the mechanical arts, is, that they
commonly produce some refinements in the liberal; nor can one be carried to
perfection, without being accompanied, in some degree, with the other. The same age,
which produces great philosophers and politicians, renowned generals and poets,
usually abounds with skilful weavers, and ship-carpenters. We cannot reasonably
expect, that a piece of woollen cloth will be wrought to perfection in a nation, which
is ignorant of astronomy, or where ethics are neglected. The spirit of the age affects
all the arts; and the minds of men, being once roused from their lethargy, and put into
a fermentation, turn themselves on all sides, and carry improvements into every art
and science. Profound ignorance is totally banished, and men enjoy the privilege of
rational creatures, to think as well as to act, to cultivate the pleasures of the mind as
well as those of the body.
The more these refined arts advance, the more sociable men become: nor is it
possible, that, when enriched with science, and possessed of a fund° of conversation,
they should be contented to remain in solitude, or live with their fellow-citizens in
that distant manner, which is peculiar to ignorant and barbarous nations. They flock
into cities; love to receive and communicate knowledge; to show their wit or their
breeding; their taste in conversation or living, in clothes or furniture. Curiosity allures
the wise; vanity the foolish; and pleasure both. Particular clubs and societies are every
where formed: Both sexes meet in an easy and sociable manner; and the tempers of
men, as well as their behaviour, refine apace.° So that, beside the improvements
which they receive from knowledge and the liberal arts, it is impossible but they must
feel an encrease of humanity, from the very habit of conversing together, and
contributing to each other’s pleasure and entertainment. Thus industry, knowledge,
and humanity, are linked together by an indissoluble chain, and are found, from
experience as well as reason, to be peculiar to the more polished, and, what are
commonly denominated, the more luxurious ages.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 164 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Nor are these advantages attended with disadvantages, that bear any proportion to
them. The more men refine upon pleasure, the less will they indulge in excesses of
any kind; because nothing is more destructive to true pleasure than such excesses.
One may safely affirm, that the Tartars1 are oftener guilty of beastly gluttony, when
they feast on their dead horses, than European courtiers with all their refinements of
cookery. And if libertine love, or even infidelity to the marriage-bed, be more
frequent in polite ages, when it is often regarded only as a piece of gallantry;
drunkenness, on the other hand, is much less common: A vice more odious, and more
pernicious both to mind and body. And in this matter I would appeal, not only to an
Ovid or a Petronius,2 but to a Seneca or a Cato. We know, that Cæsar, during
Catiline’s conspiracy, being necessitated to put into Cato’s hands a billet-doux,°
which discovered° an intrigue with Servilia, Cato’s own sister, that stern philosopher
threw it back to him with indignation; and in the bitterness of his wrath, gave him the
appellation of drunkard, as a term more opprobrious than that with which he could
more justly have reproached him.3
But industry, knowledge, and humanity, are not advantageous in private life alone:
They diffuse their beneficial influence on the public, and render the government as
great and flourishing as they make individuals happy and prosperous. The encrease
and consumption of all the commodities, which serve to the ornament and pleasure of
life, are advantageous to society; because, at the same time that they multiply those
innocent gratifications to individuals, they are a kind of storehouse of labour, which,
in the exigencies of state, may be turned to the public service. In a nation, where there
is no demand for such superfluities, men sink into indolence, lose all enjoyment of
life, and are useless to the public, which cannot maintain or support its fleets and
armies, from the industry of such slothful members.
The bounds of all the European kingdoms are, at present, nearly the same they were
two hundred years ago: But what a difference is there in the power and grandeur of
those kingdoms? Which can be ascribed to nothing but the encrease of art and
industry. When Charles VIII. of France invaded Italy, he carried with him about
20,000 men: Yet this armament so exhausted the nation, as we learn from
Guicciardin, that for some years it was not able to make so great an effort.4 The late
king of France, in time of war, kept in pay above 400,000 men;5 though from
Mazarine’s death to his own, he was engaged in a course of wars that lasted near
thirty years.
This industry is much promoted by the knowledge inseparable from ages of art and
refinement; as, on the other hand, this knowledge enables the public to make the best
advantage of the industry of its subjects. Laws, order, police, discipline; these can
never be carried to any degree of perfection, before human reason has refined itself by
exercise, and by an application to the more vulgar arts, at least, of commerce and
manufacture. Can we expect, that a government will be well modelled by a people,
who know not how to make a spinning-wheel, or to employ a loom to advantage? Not
to mention, that all ignorant ages are infested with superstition, which throws the
government off its bias,° and disturbs men in the pursuit of their interest and
happiness.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 165 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Knowledge in the arts of government naturally begets mildness and moderation, by
instructing men in the advantages of humane maxims above rigour and severity,
which drive subjects into rebellion, and make the return to submission impracticable,
by cutting off all hopes of pardon. When the tempers of men are softened as well as
their knowledge improved, this humanity appears still more conspicuous, and is the
chief characteristic which distinguishes a civilized age from times of barbarity and
ignorance. Factions are then less inveterate,° revolutions less tragical,° authority less
severe, and seditions less frequent. Even foreign wars abate of their cruelty; and after
the field of battle, where honour and interest steel men against compassion as well as
fear, the combatants divest themselves of the brute, and resume the man.
Nor need we fear, that men, by losing their ferocity, will lose their martial spirit, or
become less undaunted° and vigorous in defence of their country or their liberty. The
arts have no such effect in enervating either the mind or body. On the contrary,
industry, their inseparable attendant, adds new force to both. And if anger, which is
said to be the whetstone of courage, loses somewhat of its asperity, by politeness and
refinement; a sense of honour, which is a stronger, more constant, and more
governable principle, acquires fresh vigour by that elevation of genius which arises
from knowledge and a good education. Add to this, that courage can neither have any
duration, nor be of any use, when not accompanied with discipline and martial skill,
which are seldom found among a barbarous people. The ancients remarked, that
Datames was the only barbarian that ever knew the art of war.6 And Pyrrhus, seeing
the Romans marshal their army with some art and skill, said with surprize, These
barbarians have nothing barbarous in their discipline!7 It is observable, that, as the
old Romans, by applying themselves solely to war, were almost the only uncivilized
people that ever possessed military discipline; so the modern Italians are the only
civilized people, among Europeans, that ever wanted courage and a martial spirit.
Those who would ascribe this effeminacy of the Italians to their luxury, or politeness,
or application to the arts, need but consider the French and English, whose bravery is
as uncontestable, as their love for the arts, and their assiduity in commerce. The
Italian historians give us a more satisfactory reason for this degeneracy of their
countrymen. They shew us how the sword was dropped at once by all the Italian
sovereigns; while the Venetian aristocracy was jealous of its subjects, the Florentine
democracy applied itself entirely to commerce; Rome was governed by priests, and
Naples by women. War then became the business of soldiers of fortune, who spared
one another, and to the astonishment of the world, could engage a whole day in what
they called a battle, and return at night to their camp, without the least bloodshed.
What has chiefly induced severe moralists to declaim against refinement in the arts, is
the example of ancient Rome, which, joining, to its poverty and rusticity, virtue and
public spirit, rose to such a surprizing height of grandeur and liberty; but having
learned from its conquered provinces b the Asiatic luxury, fell into every kind of
corruption; whence arose sedition and civil wars, attended at last with the total loss of
liberty. All the Latin classics, whom we peruse in our infancy, are full of these
sentiments, and universally ascribe the ruin of their state to the arts and riches
imported from the East: Insomuch that Sallust represents a taste for painting as a vice,
no less than lewdness and drinking. And so popular were these sentiments, during the
later ages of the republic, that this author abounds in praises of the old rigid Roman
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 166 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
virtue, though himself the most egregious instance of modern luxury and corruption;
speaks contemptuously of the Grecian eloquence, though the most elegant writer in
the world; nay, employs preposterous digressions and declamations to this purpose,
though a model of taste and correctness.8
But it would be easy to prove, that these writers mistook the cause of the disorders in
the Roman state, and ascribed to luxury and the arts, what really proceeded from an ill
modelled government, and the unlimited extent of conquests. c Refinement on the
pleasures and conveniencies of life has no natural tendency to beget venality and
corruption. The value, which all men put upon any particular pleasure, depends on
comparison and experience; nor is a porter less greedy of money, which he spends on
bacon and brandy, than a courtier, who purchases champagne and ortolans.° Riches
are valuable at all times, and to all men; because they always purchase pleasures, such
as men are accustomed to, and desire: Nor can any thing restrain or regulate the love
of money, but a sense of honour and virtue; which, if it be not nearly equal at all
times, will naturally abound most in ages of knowledge and refinement.
Of all European kingdoms, Poland seems the most defective in the arts of war as well
as peace, mechanical as well as liberal; yet it is there that venality and corruption do
most prevail. The nobles seem to have preserved their crown elective for no other
purpose, than regularly to sell it to the highest bidder. This is almost the only species
of commerce, with which that people are acquainted.
The liberties of England, so far from decaying since the improvements in the arts,
have never flourished so much as during that period. And though corruption may
seem to encrease of late years; this is chiefly to be ascribed to our established liberty,
when our princes have found the impossibility of governing without parliaments, or of
terrifying parliaments by the phantom of prerogative.9 Not to mention, that this
corruption or venality prevails much more among the electors than the elected; and
therefore cannot justly be ascribed to any refinements in luxury.
If we consider the matter in a proper light, we shall find, that a progress in the arts is
rather favourable to liberty, and has a natural tendency to preserve, if not produce a
free government. In rude unpolished nations, where the arts are neglected, all labour is
bestowed on the cultivation of the ground; and the whole society is divided into two
classes, proprietors of land, and their vassals or tenants. The latter are necessarily
dependent, and fitted for slavery and subjection; especially where they possess no
riches, and are not valued for their knowledge in agriculture; as must always be the
case where the arts are neglected. The former naturally erect themselves into petty
tyrants; and must either submit to an absolute master, for the sake of peace and order;
or if they will preserve their independency, like the d ancient barons, they must fall
into feuds and contests among themselves, and throw the whole society into such
confusion, as is perhaps worse than the most despotic government. But where luxury
nourishes commerce and industry, the peasants, by a proper cultivation of the land,
become rich and independent; while the tradesmen and merchants acquire a share of
the property, and draw authority and consideration to that middling rank of men, who
are the best and firmest basis of public liberty. These submit not to slavery, like the
peasants, from poverty and meanness of spirit; and having no hopes of tyrannizing
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 167 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
over others, like the barons, they are not tempted, for the sake of that gratification, to
submit to the tyranny of their sovereign. They covet equal laws, which may secure
their property, and preserve them from monarchical, as well as aristocratical tyranny.
The lower house is the support of our popular government; and all the world
acknowledges, that it owed its chief influence and consideration to the encrease of
commerce, which threw such a balance of property into the hands of the commons.
How inconsistent then is it to blame so violently a refinement in the arts, and to
represent it as the bane of liberty and public spirit!
To declaim against present times, and magnify the virtue of remote ancestors, is a
propensity almost inherent in human nature: And as the sentiments and opinions of
civilized ages alone are transmitted to posterity, hence it is that we meet with so many
severe judgments pronounced against luxury, and even science; and hence it is that at
present we give so ready an assent to them. But the fallacy is easily perceived, by
comparing different nations that are contemporaries; where we both judge more
impartially, and can better set in opposition those manners, with which we are
sufficiently acquainted. Treachery and cruelty, the most pernicious and most odious
of all vices, seem peculiar to uncivilized ages; and by the refined Greeks and Romans
were ascribed to all the barbarous nations, which surrounded them. They might justly,
therefore, have presumed, that their own ancestors, so highly celebrated, possessed no
greater virtue, and were as much inferior to their posterity in honour and humanity, as
in taste and science. An ancient Frank or Saxon may be highly extolled: But I believe
every man would think his life or fortune much less secure in the hands of a Moor or
Tartar, than in those of a French or English gentleman, the rank of men the most
civilized in the most civilized nations.
We come now to the second position which we proposed to illustrate, to wit, that, as
innocent luxury, or a refinement in the arts and conveniencies of life, is advantageous
to the public; so wherever luxury ceases to be innocent, it also ceases to be beneficial;
and when carried a degree farther, begins to be a quality pernicious, though, perhaps,
not the most pernicious, to political society.
Let us consider what we call vicious luxury. No gratification, however sensual, can of
itself be esteemed vicious. A gratification is only vicious, when it engrosses all a
man’s expence, and leaves no ability for such acts of duty and generosity as are
required by his situation and fortune. Suppose, that he correct the vice, and employ
part of his expence in the education of his children, in the support of his friends, and
in relieving the poor; would any prejudice result to society? On the contrary, the same
consumption would arise; and that labour, which, at present, is employed only in
producing a slender gratification to one man, would relieve the necessitous, and
bestow satisfaction on hundreds. The same care and toil that raise a dish of peas at
Christmas, would give bread to a whole family during six months. To say, that,
without a vicious luxury, the labour would not have been employed at all, is only to
say, that there is some other defect in human nature, such as indolence, selfishness,
inattention to others, for which luxury, in some measure, provides a remedy; as one
poison may be an antidote to another. But virtue, like wholesome food, is better than
poisons, however corrected.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 168 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Suppose the same number of men, that are at present in Great Britain, with the same
soil and climate; I ask, is it not possible for them to be happier, by the most perfect
way of life that can be imagined, and by the greatest reformation that Omnipotence
itself could work in their temper and disposition? To assert, that they cannot, appears
evidently ridiculous. As the land is able to maintain more than all its present
inhabitants, they could never, in such a Utopian state, feel any other ills than those
which arise from bodily sickness; and these are not the half of human miseries. All
other ills spring from some vice, either in ourselves or others; and even many of our
diseases proceed from the same origin. Remove the vices, and the ills follow. You
must only take care to remove all the vices. If you remove part, you may render the
matter worse. By banishing vicious luxury, without curing sloth and an indifference to
others, you only diminish industry in the state, and add nothing to men’s charity or
their generosity. Let us, therefore, rest contented with asserting, that two opposite
vices in a state may be more advantageous than either of them alone; but let us never
pronounce vice in itself advantageous. Is it not very inconsistent for an author to
assert in one page, that moral distinctions are inventions of politicians for public
interest; and in the next page maintain, that vice is advantageous to the public?10 And
indeed it seems upon any system of morality, little less than a contradiction in terms,
to talk of a vice, which is in general beneficial to society.e
I thought this reasoning necessary, in order to give some light to a philosophical
question, which has been much disputed in England. I call it a philosophical question,
not a political one. For whatever may be the consequence of such a miraculous
transformation of mankind, as would endow them with every species of virtue, and
free them from every species of vice; this concerns not the magistrate, who aims only
at possibilities. He cannot cure every vice by substituting a virtue in its place. Very
often he can only cure one vice by another; and in that case, he ought to prefer what is
least pernicious to society. Luxury, when excessive, is the source of many ills; but is
in general preferable to sloth and idleness, which would commonly succeed in its
place, and are more hurtful both to private persons and to the public. When sloth
reigns, a mean uncultivated way of life prevails amongst individuals, without society,
without enjoyment. And if the sovereign, in such a situation, demands the service of
his subjects, the labour of the state suffices only to furnish the necessaries of life to
the labourers, and can afford nothing to those who are employed in the public service.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 169 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY III
OF MONEY
Money is not, properly speaking, one of the subjects of commerce; but only the
instrument which men have agreed upon to facilitate the exchange of one commodity
for another. It is none of the wheels of trade: It is the oil which renders the motion of
the wheels more smooth and easy. If we consider any one kingdom by itself, it is
evident, that the greater or less plenty of money is of no consequence; since the prices
of commodities are always proportioned to the plenty of money, and a crown in Harry
VII.’s time served the same purpose as a pound does at present.1 It is only the public
which draws any advantage from the greater plenty of money; and that only in its
wars and negociations with foreign states. And this is the reason, why all rich and
trading countries from Carthage to Great Britain and Holland, have employed
mercenary troops, which they hired from their poorer neighbours. Were they to make
use of their native subjects, they would find less advantage from their superior riches,
and from their great plenty of gold and silver; since the pay of all their servants must
rise in proportion to the public opulence. Our small army of 20,000 men is maintained
at as great expence as a French army a twice as numerous. The English fleet, during
the late war,2 required as much money to support it as all the Roman legions, which
kept the whole world in subjection, during the time of the emperors.3
The greater number of people and their greater industry are serviceable in all cases; at
home and abroad, in private, and in public. But the greater plenty of money, is very
limited in its use, and may even sometimes be a loss to a nation in its commerce with
foreigners.
There seems to be a happy concurrence of causes in human affairs, which checks the
growth of trade and riches, and hinders them from being confined entirely to one
people; as might naturally at first be dreaded from the advantages of an established
commerce. Where one nation has gotten the start of another in trade, it is very
difficult for the latter to regain the ground it has lost; because of the superior industry
and skill of the former, and the greater stocks, of which its merchants are possessed,
and which enable them to trade on so much smaller profits. But these advantages are
compensated, in some measure, by the low price of labour in every nation which has
not an extensive commerce, and does not much abound in gold and silver.
Manufactures, therefore gradually shift their places, leaving those countries and
provinces which they have already enriched, and flying to others, whither they are
allured by the cheapness of provisions and labour; till they have enriched these also,
and are again banished by the same causes. And, in general, we may observe, that the
dearness° of every thing, from plenty of money, is a disadvantage, which attends an
established commerce, and sets bounds to it in every country, by enabling the poorer
states to undersel the richer in all foreign markets.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 170 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
This has made me entertain a doubt concerning the benefit of banks and paper-credit,
which are so generally esteemed advantageous to every nation. That provisions and
labour should become dear by the encrease of trade and money, is, in many respects,
an inconvenience; but an inconvenience that is unavoidable, and the effect of that
public wealth and prosperity which are the end of all our wishes. It is compensated by
the advantages, which we reap from the possession of these precious metals, and the
weight, which they give the nation in all foreign wars and negociations. But there
appears no reason for encreasing that inconvenience by a counterfeit money, which
foreigners will not accept of in any payment, and which any great disorder in the state
will reduce to nothing. There are, it is true, many people in every rich state, who
having large sums of money, would prefer paper with good security; as being of more
easy transport and more safe custody. If the public provide not a bank, private bankers
will take advantage of this circumstance; as the goldsmiths formerly did in London, or
as the bankers do at present in Dublin: And therefore it is better, it may be thought,
that a public company should enjoy the benefit of that paper-credit, which always will
have place in every opulent kingdom. But to endeavour artificially to encrease such a
credit, can never be the interest of any trading nation; but must lay them under
disadvantages, by encreasing money beyond its natural proportion to labour and
commodities, and thereby heightening their price to the merchant and manufacturer.
And in this view, it must be allowed, that no bank could be more advantageous, than
such a one as locked up all the money it received,4 and never augmented the
circulating coin, as is usual, by returning part of its treasure into commerce. A public
bank, by this expedient, might cut off much of the dealings of private bankers and
money-jobbers; and though the state bore the charge of salaries to the directors and
tellers of this bank (for, according to the preceding supposition, it would have no
profit from its dealings), the national advantage, resulting from the low price of labour
and the destruction of paper-credit, would be a sufficient compensation. Not to
mention, that so large a sum, lying ready at command, would be a convenience in
times of great public danger and distress; and what part of it was used might be
replaced at leisure, when peace and tranquillity was restored to the nation.
But of this subject of paper credit we shall treat more largely hereafter. And I shall
finish this essay on money, by proposing and explaining two observations, which
may, perhaps, serve to employ the thoughts of our speculative politicians.c
It was a shrewd observation of Anacharsis5 the Scythian, who had never seen money
in his own country, that gold and silver seemed to him of no use to the Greeks, but to
assist them in numeration and arithmetic. It is indeed evident, that money is nothing
but the representation of labour and commodities, and serves only as a method of
rating or estimating them. Where coin is in greater plenty; as a greater quantity of it is
required to represent the same quantity of goods; it can have no effect, either good or
bad, taking a nation within itself; any more than it would make an alteration on a
merchant’s books, if, instead of the Arabian method of notation, which requires few
characters, he should make use of the Roman, which requires a great many. Nay, the
greater quantity of money, like the Roman characters, is rather inconvenient, and
requires greater trouble both to keep and transport it. But notwithstanding this
conclusion, which must be allowed just, it is certain, that, since the discovery of the
mines in America, industry has encreased in all the nations of Europe, except in the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 171 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
possessors of those mines; and this may justly be ascribed, amongst other reasons, to
the encrease of gold and silver. Accordingly we find, that, in every kingdom, into
which money begins to flow in greater abundance than formerly, every thing takes a
new face: labour and industry gain life; the merchant becomes more enterprising, the
manufacturer more diligent and skilful, and even the farmer follows his plough with
greater alacrity and attention. This is not easily to be accounted for, if we consider
only the influence which a greater abundance of coin has in the kingdom itself, by
heightening the price of commodities, and obliging every one to pay a greater number
of these little yellow or white pieces for every thing he purchases. And as to foreign
trade, it appears, that great plenty of money is rather disadvantageous, by raising the
price of every kind of labour.
To account, then, for this phenomenon, we must consider, that though the high price
of commodities be a necessary consequence of the encrease of gold and silver, yet it
follows not immediately upon that encrease; but some time is required before the
money circulates through the whole state, and makes its effect be felt on all ranks of
people. At first, no alteration is perceived; by degrees the price rises, first of one
commodity, then of another; till the whole at last reaches a just proportion with the
new quantity of specie which is in the kingdom. In my opinion, it is only in this
interval or intermediate situation, between the acquisition of money and rise of prices,
that the encreasing quantity of gold and silver is favourable to industry. When any
quantity of money is imported into a nation, it is not at first dispersed into many
hands; but is confined to the coffers of a few persons, who immediately seek to
employ it to advantage. Here are a set of manufacturers or merchants, we shall
suppose, who have received returns of gold and silver for goods which they sent to
Cadiz.6 They are thereby enabled to employ more workmen than formerly, who never
dream of demanding higher wages, but are glad of employment from such good
paymasters. If workmen become scarce, the manufacturer gives higher wages, but at
first requires an encrease of labour; and this is willingly submitted to by the artisan,
who can now eat and drink better, to compensate his additional toil and fatigue. He
carries his money to market, where he finds every thing at the same price as formerly,
but returns with greater quantity and of better kinds, for the use of his family. The
farmer and gardener, finding, that all their commodities are taken off, apply
themselves with alacrity to the raising more; and at the same time can afford to take
better and more cloths from their tradesmen, whose price is the same as formerly, and
their industry only whetted by so much new gain. It is easy to trace the money in its
progress through the whole commonwealth; where we shall find, that it must first
quicken the diligence of every individual, before it encrease the price of labour.
And that the specie° may encrease to a considerable pitch, before it have this latter
effect, appears, amongst other instances, from the frequent operations of the French
king on the money; where it was always found, that the augmenting of the numerary
value did not produce a proportional rise of the prices, at least for some time. In the
last year of Louis XIV. money was raised three-sevenths, but prices augmented only
one. Corn in France is now sold at the same price, or for the same number of livres, it
was in 1683; though silver was then at 30 livres the mark, and is now at 50.7 Not to
mention the great addition of gold and silver, which may have come into that
kingdom since the former period.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 172 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
From the whole of this reasoning we may conclude, that it is of no manner of
consequence, with regard to the domestic happiness of a state, whether money be in a
greater or less quantity. The good policy of the magistrate consists only in keeping it,
if possible, still encreasing; because, by that means, he keeps alive a spirit of industry
in the nation, and encreases the stock of labour, in which consists all real power and
riches. A nation, whose money decreases, is actually, at that time, weaker and more
miserable than another nation, which possesses no more money, but is on the
encreasing hand. This will be easily accounted for, if we consider, that the alterations
in the quantity of money, either on one side or the other, are not immediately attended
with proportionable alterations in the price of commodities. There is always an
interval before matters be adjusted to their new situation; and this interval is as
pernicious to industry, when gold and silver are diminishing, as it is advantageous
when these metals are encreasing. The workman has not the same employment from
the manufacturer and merchant; though he pays the same price for every thing in the
market. The farmer cannot dispose of his corn and cattle; though he must pay the
same rent to his landlord. The poverty, and beggary, and sloth, which must ensue, are
easily foreseen.
II. The second observation which I proposed to make with regard to money, may be
explained after the following manner. There are some kingdoms, and many provinces
in Europe, (and all of them were once in the same condition) where money is so
scarce, that the landlord can get none at all from his tenants; but is obliged to take his
rent in kind, and either to consume it himself, or transport it to places where he may
find a market. In those countries, the prince can levy few or no taxes, but in the same
manner: And as he will receive small benefit from impositions so paid, it is evident
that such a kingdom has little force even at home; and cannot maintain fleets and
armies to the same extent, as if every part of it abounded in gold and silver. There is
surely a greater disproportion between the force of Germany, at present, and what it
was three centuries ago,8 than there is in its industry, people, and manufactures. The
Austrian dominions in the empire are in general well peopled and well cultivated, and
are of great extent; but have not a proportionable weight in the balance of Europe;
proceeding, as is commonly supposed, from the scarcity of money. How do all these
facts agree with that principle of reason, that the quantity of gold and silver is in itself
altogether indifferent? According to that principle wherever a sovereign has numbers
of subjects, and these have plenty of commodities, he should of course be great and
powerful, and they rich and happy, independent of the greater or lesser abundance of
the precious metals. These admit of divisions and subdivisions to a great extent; and
where the pieces might become so small as to be in danger of being lost, it is easy to
mix the gold or silver with a baser metal, as is practised in some countries of Europe;
and by that means raise the pieces to a bulk more sensible and convenient. They still
serve the same purposes of exchange, whatever their number may be, or whatever
colour they may be supposed to have.
To these difficulties I answer, that the effect, here supposed to flow from scarcity of
money, really arises from the manners and customs of the people; and that we
mistake, as is too usual, a collateral effect for a cause. The contradiction is only
apparent; but it requires some thought and reflection to discover the principles, by
which we can reconcile reason to experience.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 173 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
It seems a maxim almost self-evident, that the prices of every thing depend on the
proportion between commodities and money, and that any considerable alteration on
either has the same effect, either of heightening or lowering the price. Encrease the
commodities, they become cheaper; encrease the money, they rise in their value. As,
on the other hand, a diminution of the former, and that of the latter, have contrary
tendencies.
It is also evident, that the prices do not so much depend on the absolute quantity of
commodities and that of money, which are in a nation, as on that of the commodities,
which come or may come to market, and of the money which circulates. If the coin be
locked up in chests, it is the same thing with regard to prices, as if it were annihilated;
if the commodities be hoarded in e magazines and granaries, a like effect follows. As
the money and commodities, in these cases, never meet, they cannot affect each other.
Were we, at any time, to form conjectures concerning the price of provisions, the
corn, which the farmer must reserve f for seed and for the maintenance of himself and
family, ought never to enter into the estimation. It is only the overplus,° compared to
the demand, that determines the value.
To apply these principles, we must consider, that, in the first and more uncultivated
ages of any state, ere fancy has confounded her wants with those of nature, men,
content with the produce of their own fields, or with those rude improvements which
they themselves can work upon them, have little occasion for exchange, at least for
money, which, by agreement, is the common measure of exchange. The wool of the
farmer’s own flock, spun in his own family, and wrought by a neighbouring weaver,
who receives his payment in corn or wool, suffices for furniture and cloathing. The
carpenter, the smith, the mason, the tailor, are retained by wages of a like nature; and
the landlord himself, dwelling in the neighbourhood, is content to receive his rent in
the commodities raised by the farmer. The greater part of these he consumes at home,
in rustic hospitality: The rest, perhaps, he disposes of for money to the neighbouring
town, whence he draws the few materials of his expence and luxury.
But after men begin to refine on all these enjoyments, and live not always at home,
nor are content with what can be raised in their neighbourhood, there is more
exchange and commerce of all kinds, and more money enters into that exchange. The
tradesmen will not be paid in corn; because they want something more than barely to
eat. The farmer goes beyond his own parish for the commodities he purchases, and
cannot always carry his commodities to the merchant who supplies him. The landlord
lives in the capital, or in a foreign country; and demands his rent in gold and silver,
which can easily be transported to him. Great undertakers, and manufacturers, and
merchants, arise in every commodity; and these can conveniently deal in nothing but
in specie. And consequently, in this situation of society, the coin enters into many
more contracts, and by that means is much more employed than in the former.
The necessary effect is, that, provided the money encrease not in the nation, every
thing must become much cheaper in times of industry and refinement, than in rude,
uncultivated ages. It is the proportion between the circulating money, and the
commodities in the market, which determines the prices. Goods, that are consumed at
home, or exchanged with other goods in the neighbourhood, never come to market;
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 174 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
they affect not in the least the current specie; with regard to it they are as if totally
annihilated; and consequently this method of using them sinks the proportion on the
side of the commodities, and encreases the prices. But after money enters into all
contracts and sales, and is every where the measure of exchange, the same national
cash has a much greater task to perform; all commodities are then in the market; the
sphere of circulation is enlarged; it is the same case as if that individual sum were to
serve a larger kingdom; and therefore, the proportion being here lessened on the side
of the money, every thing must become cheaper, and the prices gradually fall.
By the most exact computations, that have been formed all over Europe, after making
allowance for the alteration in the numerary° value or the denomination, it is found,
that the prices of all things have only risen three, or at most, four times, since the
discovery of the West Indies.9 But will any one assert, that there is not much more
than four times the coin in Europe, that was in the fifteenth century, and the centuries
preceding it? The Spaniards and Portuguese from their mines, the English, French,
and Dutch, by their African trade, and by their interlopers in the West Indies, bring
home about g six millions a year, of which not above a third goes to the East-Indies.
This sum alone, in ten years, would probably double the ancient stock of money in
Europe. And no other satisfactory reason can be given, why all prices have not risen
to a much more exorbitant height, except that which is derived from a change of
customs and manners. Besides that more commodities are produced by additional
industry, the same commodities come more to market, after men depart from their
ancient simplicity of manners. And though this encrease has not been equal to that of
money, it has, however, been considerable, and has preserved the proportion between
coin and commodities nearer the ancient standard.
Were the question proposed, Which of these methods of living in the people, the
simple or refined, is the most advantageous to the state or public? I should, without
much scruple, prefer the latter, in a view to politics at least; and should produce this as
an additional reason for the encouragement of trade and manufactures.
While men live in the ancient simple manner, and supply all their necessaries from
domestic industry or from the neighbourhood, the sovereign can levy no taxes in
money from a considerable part of his subjects; and if he will impose on them any
burthens, he must take payment in commodities, with which alone they abound; a
method attended with such great and obvious inconveniencies, that they need not here
be insisted on. All the money he can pretend to raise, must be from his principal
cities, where alone it circulates; and these, it is evident, cannot afford him so much as
the whole state could, did gold and silver circulate throughout the whole. But besides
this obvious diminution of the revenue, there is another cause of the poverty of the
public in such a situation. Not only the sovereign receives less money, but the same
money goes not so far as in times of industry and general commerce. Every thing is
dearer, where the gold and silver are supposed equal; and that because fewer
commodities come to market, and the whole coin bears a higher proportion to what is
to be purchased by it; whence alone the prices of every thing are fixed and
determined.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 175 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Here then we may learn the fallacy of the remark, often to be met with in historians,
and even in common conversation, that any particular state is weak, though fertile,
populous, and well cultivated, merely because it wants money. It appears, that the
want of money can never injure any state within itself: For men and commodities are
the real strength of any community. It is the simple manner of living which here hurts
the public, by confining the gold and silver to few hands, and preventing its universal
diffusion and circulation. On the contrary, industry and refinements of all kinds
incorporate it with the whole state, however small its quantity may be: They digest it
into every vein, so to speak; and make it enter into every transaction and contract. No
hand is entirely empty of it. And as the prices of every thing fall by that means, the
sovereign has a double advantage: He may draw money by his taxes from every part
of the state; and what he receives, goes farther in every purchase and payment.
We may infer, from a comparison of prices, that money is not more plentiful in China,
than it was in Europe three centuries ago: But what immense power is that empire
possessed of, if we may judge by the civil and military establishment maintained by
it? Polybius10 tells us, that provisions were so cheap in Italy during his time, that in
some places theh stated price for a meal at the inns was a semis a head, little more
than a farthing! Yet the Roman power had even then subdued the whole known world.
About a century before that period, the Carthaginian ambassador said, by way of
raillery, that no people lived more sociably amongst themselves than the Romans; for
that, in every entertainment, which, as foreign ministers, they received, they still
observed the same plate at every table.11 The absolute quantity of the precious metals
is a matter of great indifference. There are only two circumstances of any importance,
namely, their gradual encrease, and their thorough concoction and circulation through
the state; and the influence of both these circumstances has here been explained.
In the following Essay we shall see an instance of a like fallacy as that above
mentioned; where a collateral effect is taken for a cause, and where a consequence is
ascribed to the plenty of money; though it be really owing to a change in the manners
and customs of the people.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 176 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY IV
OF INTEREST
Nothing is esteemed a more certain sign of the flourishing condition of any nation
than the lowness of interest: And with reason; though I believe the cause is somewhat
different from what is commonly apprehended. Lowness of interest is generally
ascribed to plenty of money.1 But money, however plentiful, has no other effect, if
fixed, than to raise the price of labour. Silver is more common than gold; and
therefore you receive a greater quantity of it for the same commodities. But do you
pay less interest for it? Interest in Batavia and Jamaica is at 10 per cent. in Portugal at
6; though these places, as we may learn from the prices of every thing, abound more
in gold and silver than either London or Amsterdam.
Were all the gold in England annihilated at once, and one and twenty shillings
substituted in the place of every guinea, would money be more plentiful or interest
lower? No surely: We should only use silver instead of gold. Were gold rendered as
common as silver, and silver as common as copper; would money be more plentiful or
interest lower? We may assuredly give the same answer. Our shillings would then be
yellow, and our halfpence white; and we should have no guineas. No other difference
would ever be observed; no alteration on commerce, manufactures, navigation, or
interest; unless we imagine, that the colour of the metal is of any consequence.
Now, what is so visible in these greater variations of scarcity or abundance in the
precious metals, must hold in all inferior changes. If the multiplying of gold and silver
fifteen times makes no difference, much less can the doubling or tripling them. All
augmentation has no other effect than to heighten the price of labour and
commodities; and even this variation is little more than that of a name. In the progress
towards these changes, the augmentation may have some influence, by exciting
industry; but after the prices are settled, suitably to the new abundance of gold and
silver, it has no manner of influence.
An effect always holds proportion with its cause. Prices have risen near four times
since the discovery of the Indies; and it is probable gold and silver have multiplied
much more: But interest has not fallen much above half. The rate of interest,
therefore, is not derived from the quantity of the precious metals.
Money having chiefly a fictitious value,a the greater or less plenty of it is of no
consequence, if we consider a nation within itself; and the quantity of specie, when
once fixed, though ever so large, has no other effect, than to oblige every one to tell
out° a greater number of those shining bits of metal, for clothes, furniture or equipage,
without encreasing any one convenience of life. If a man borrow money to build a
house, he then carries home a greater load; because the stone, timber, lead, glass, &c.
with the labour of the masons and carpenters, are represented by a greater quantity of
gold and silver. But as these metals are considered chiefly as representations, there
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 177 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
can no alteration arise, from their bulk or quantity, their weight or colour, either upon
their real value or their interest. The same interest, in all cases, bears the same
proportion to the sum. And if you lent me so much labour and so many commodities;
by receiving five per cent. you always receive proportional labour and commodities,
however represented, whether by yellow or white coin, whether by a pound or an
ounce. It is in vain, therefore, to look for the cause of the fall or rise of interest in the
greater or less quantity of gold and silver, which is fixed in any nation.
High interest arises from three circumstances: A great demand for borrowing; little
riches to supply that demand; and great profits arising from commerce: And these
circumstances are a clear proof of the small advance of commerce and industry, not of
the scarcity of gold and silver. Low interest, on the other hand, proceeds from the
three opposite circumstances: A small demand for borrowing; great riches to supply
that demand; and small profits arising from commerce: And these circumstances are
all connected together, and proceed from the encrease of industry and commerce, not
of gold and silver. We shall endeavour to prove these points; and shall begin with the
causes and the effects of a great or small demand for borrowing.
When a people have emerged ever so little from a savage state, and their numbers
have encreased beyond the original multitude, there must immediately arise an
inequality of property; and while some possess large tracts of land, others are
confined within narrow limits, and some are entirely without any landed property.
Those who possess more land than they can labour, employ those who possess none,
and agree to receive a determinate part of the product. Thus the landed interest is
immediately established; nor is there any settled government, however rude, in which
affairs are not on this footing. Of these proprietors of land, some must presently
discover themselves to be of different tempers from others; and while one would
willingly store up the produce of his land for futurity,° another desires to consume at
present what should suffice for many years. But as the spending of a settled revenue is
a way of life entirely without occupation;° men have so much need of somewhat° to
fix and engage them, that pleasures, such as they are, will be the pursuit of the greater
part of the landholders, and the prodigals among them will always be more numerous
than the misers. In a state, therefore, where there is nothing but a landed interest, as
there is little frugality, the borrowers must be very numerous, and the rate of interest
must hold proportion to it. The difference depends not on the quantity of money, but
on the habits and manners which prevail. By this alone the demand for borrowing is
encreased or diminished. Were money so plentiful as to make an egg be sold for
sixpence; so long as there are only landed gentry and peasants in the state, the
borrowers must be numerous, and interest high. The rent for the same farm would be
heavier and more bulky: But the same idleness of the landlord, with the higher price
of commodities, would dissipate it in the same time, and produce the same necessity
and demand for borrowing.b
Nor is the case different with regard to the second circumstance which we proposed to
consider, namely, the great or little riches to supply the demand. This effect also
depends on the habits and way of living of the people, not on the quantity of gold and
silver. In order to have, in any state, a great number of lenders, it is not sufficient nor
requisite, that there be great abundance of the precious metals. It is only requisite, that
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 178 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the property or command of that quantity, which is in the state, whether great or
small, should be collected in particular hands, so as to form considerable sums, or
compose a great monied interest. This begets a number of lenders, and sinks the rate
of usury; and this I shall venture to affirm, depends not on the quantity of specie, but
on particular manners and customs, which make the specie gather into separate sums
or masses of considerable value.
For suppose, that, by miracle, every man in Great Britain should have five pounds
slipt into his pocket in one night; this would much more than double the whole money
that is at present in the kingdom; yet there would not next day, nor for some time, be
any more lenders, nor any variation in the interest. And were there nothing but
landlords and peasants in the state, this money, however abundant, could never gather
into sums; and would only serve to encrease the prices of every thing, without any
farther consequence. The prodigal landlord dissipates it, as fast as he receives it; and
the beggarly peasant has no means, nor view, nor ambition of obtaining above a bare
livelihood. The overplus of borrowers above that of lenders continuing still the same,
there will follow no reduction of interest. That depends upon another principle; and
must proceed from an encrease of industry and frugality, of arts and commerce.
Every thing useful to the life of man arises from the ground; but few things arise in
that condition which is requisite to render them useful. There must, therefore, beside
the peasants and the proprietors of land, be another rank of men, who receiving from
the former the rude materials, work them into their proper form, and retain part for
their own use and subsistence. In the infancy of society, these contracts between the
artisans and the peasants, and between one species of artisans and another are
commonly entered into immediately by the persons themselves, who, being
neighbours, are easily acquainted with each other’s necessities, and can lend their
mutual assistance to supply them. But when men’s industry encreases, and their views
enlarge, it is found, that the most remote parts of the state can assist each other as well
as the more contiguous, and that this intercourse of good offices may be carried on to
the greatest extent and intricacy. Hence the origin of merchants, one of the most
useful races of men, who serve as agents between those parts of the state, that are
wholly unacquainted, and are ignorant of each other’s necessities. Here are in a city
fifty workmen in silk and linen, and a thousand customers; and these two ranks of
men, so necessary to each other, can never rightly meet, till one man erects a shop, to
which all the workmen and all the customers repair. In this province, grass rises in
abundance: The inhabitants abound in cheese, and butter, and cattle; but want bread
and corn, which, in a neighbouring province, are in too great abundance for the use of
the inhabitants. One man discovers this. He brings corn from the one province and
returns with cattle; and supplying the wants of both, he is, so far, a common
benefactor. As the people encrease in numbers and industry, the difficulty of their
intercourse encreases: The business of the agency or merchandize becomes more
intricate; and divides, subdivides, compounds, and mixes to a greater variety. In all
these transactions, it is necessary, and reasonable, that a considerable part of the
commodities and labour should belong to the merchant, to whom, in a great measure,
they are owing. And these commodities he will sometimes preserve in kind, or more
commonly convert into money, which is their common representation. If gold and
silver have encreased in the state together with the industry, it will require a great
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 179 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
quantity of these metals to represent a great quantity of commodities and labour. If
industry alone has encreased, the prices of every thing must sink, and a small quantity
of specie will serve as a representation.
There is no craving or demand of the human mind more constant and insatiable than
that for exercise and employment; and this desire seems the foundation of most of our
passions and pursuits. Deprive a man of all business and serious occupation, he runs
restless from one amusement to another; and the weight and oppression, which he
feels from idleness, is so great, that he forgets the ruin which must follow him from
his immoderate expences. Give him a more harmless way of employing his mind or
body, he is satisfied, and feels no longer that insatiable thirst after pleasure. But if the
employment you give him be lucrative, especially if the profit be attached to every
particular exertion of industry, he has gain so often in his eye, that he acquires, by
degrees, a passion for it, and knows no such pleasure as that of seeing the daily
encrease of his fortune. And this is the reason why trade encreases frugality, and why,
among merchants, there is the same overplus of misers above prodigals, as, among the
possessors of land, there is the contrary.
Commerce encreases industry, by conveying it readily from one member of the state
to another, and allowing none of it to perish or become useless. It encreases frugality,
by giving occupation to men, and employing them in the arts of gain, which soon
engage their affection, and remove all relish for pleasure and expence. It is an
infallible consequence of all industrious professions, to beget frugality, and make the
love of gain prevail over the love of pleasure. Among lawyers and physicians who
have any practice, there are many more who live within their income, than who
exceed it, or even live up to it. But lawyers and physicians beget no industry; and it is
even at the expence of others they acquire their riches; so that they are sure to
diminish the possessions of some of their fellow-citizens, as fast as they encrease their
own. Merchants, on the contrary, beget industry, by serving as canals to convey it
through every corner of the state: And at the same time, by their frugality, they
acquire great power over that industry, and collect a large property in the labour and
commodities, which they are the chief instruments in producing. There is no other
profession, therefore, except merchandize, which can make the monied interest
considerable, or, in other words, can encrease industry, and, by also encreasing
frugality, give a great command of that industry to particular members of the society.
Without commerce, the state must consist chiefly of landed gentry, whose prodigality
and expence make a continual demand for borrowing; and of peasants, who have no
sums to supply that demand. The money never gathers into large stocks or sums,
which can be lent at interest. It is dispersed into numberless hands, who either
squander it in idle show and magnificence, or employ it in the purchase of the
common necessaries of life. Commerce alone assembles it into considerable sums;
and this effect it has merely from the industry which it begets, and the frugality which
it inspires, independent of that particular quantity of precious metal which may
circulate in the state.
Thus an encrease of commerce, by a necessary consequence, raises a great number of
lenders, and by that means produces lowness of interest. We must now consider how
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 180 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
far this encrease of commerce diminishes the profits arising from that profession, and
gives rise to the third circumstance requisite to produce lowness of interest.
It may be proper to observe on this head, that low interest and low profits of
merchandize are two events, that mutually forward each other, and are both originally
derived from that extensive commerce, which produces opulent merchants, and
renders the monied interest considerable. Where merchants possess great stocks,
whether represented by few or many pieces of metal, it must frequently happen, that,
when they either become tired of business, or leave heirs unwilling or unfit to engage
in commerce, a great proportion of these riches naturally seeks an annual and secure
revenue. The plenty diminishes the price, and makes the lenders accept of a low
interest. This consideration obliges many to keep their stock employed in trade, and
rather be content with low profits than dispose of their money at an under-value. On
the other hand, when commerce has become extensive, and employs large stocks,
there must arise rivalships among the merchants, which diminish the profits of trade,
at the same time that they encrease the trade itself. The low profits of merchandize
induce the merchants to accept more willingly of a low interest, when they leave off
business, and begin to indulge themselves in ease and indolence. It is needless,
therefore, to enquire which of these circumstances, to wit, low interest or low profits,
is the cause, and which the effect? They both arise from an extensive commerce, and
mutually forward each other. No man will accept of low profits, where he can have
high interest; and no man will accept of low interest, where he can have high profits.
An extensive commerce, by producing large stocks, diminishes both interest and
profits; and is always assisted, in its diminution of the one, by the proportional
sinking of the other. I may add, that, as low profits arise from the encrease of
commerce and industry, they serve in their turn to its farther encrease, by rendering
the commodities cheaper, encouraging the consumption, and heightening the industry.
And thus, if we consider the whole connexion of causes and effects, interest is the
barometer of the state, and its lowness is a sign almost infallible of the flourishing
condition of a people. It proves the encrease of industry, and its prompt circulation
through the whole state, little inferior to a demonstration. And though, perhaps, it may
not be impossible but a sudden and a great check to commerce may have a
momentary effect of the same kind, by throwing so many stocks out of trade; it must
be attended with such misery and want of employment in the poor, that, besides its
short duration, it will not be possible to mistake the one case for the other.
Those who have asserted, that the plenty of money was the cause of low interest,
seem to have taken a collateral effect for a cause; since the same industry, which sinks
the interest, commonly acquires great abundance of the precious metals. A variety of
fine manufactures, with vigilant enterprising merchants, will soon draw money to a
state, if it be any where to be found in the world. The same cause, by multiplying the
conveniencies of life, and encreasing industry, collects great riches into the hands of
persons, who are not proprietors of land, and produces, by that means, a lowness of
interest. But though both these effects, plenty of money and low interest, naturally
arise from commerce and industry, they are altogether independent of each other. For
suppose a nation removed into the Pacific ocean, without any foreign commerce, or
any knowledge of navigation: Suppose, that this nation possesses always the same
stock of coin, but is continually encreasing in its numbers and industry: It is evident,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 181 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
that the price of every commodity must gradually diminish in that kingdom; since it is
the proportion between money and any species of goods, which fixes their mutual
value; and, upon the present supposition, the conveniencies of life become every day
more abundant, without any alteration in the current specie. A less quantity of money,
therefore, among this people, will make a rich man, during the times of industry, than
would suffice to that purpose, in ignorant and slothful ages. Less money will build a
house, portion a daughter, buy an estate, support a manufactory, or maintain a family
and equipage. These are the uses for which men borrow money; and therefore, the
greater or less quantity of it in a state has no influence on the interest. But it is
evident, that the greater or less stock of labour and commodities must have a great
influence; since we really and in effect borrow these, when we take money upon
interest. It is true, when commerce is extended all over the globe, the most industrious
nations always abound most with the precious metals: So that low interest and plenty
of money are in fact almost inseparable. But still it is of consequence to know the
principle whence any phenomenon arises, and to distinguish between a cause and a
concomitant effect.2 Besides that the speculation is curious, it may frequently be of
use in the conduct of public affairs. At least, it must be owned, that nothing can be of
more use than to improve, by practice, the method of reasoning on these subjects,
which of all others are the most important; though they are commonly treated in the
loosest and most careless manner.
Another reason of this popular mistake with regard to the cause of low interest, seems
to be the instance of some nations; where, after a sudden acquisition of money or of
the precious metals, by means of foreign conquest, the interest has fallen, not only
among them, but in all the neighbouring states, as soon as that money was dispersed,
and had insinuated itself into every corner. Thus, interest in Spain fell near a half
immediately after the discovery of the West Indies, as we are informed by Garcilasso
de la Vega:3 And it has been ever since gradually sinking in every kingdom of
Europe. Interest in Rome, after the conquest of Egypt, fell from 6 to 4 per cent. as we
learn from Dion.4
The causes of the sinking of interest, upon such an event, seem different in the
conquering country and in the neighbouring states; but in neither of them can we
justly ascribe that effect merely to the encrease of gold and silver.
In the conquering country, it is natural to imagine, that this new acquisition of money
will fall into a few hands, and be gathered into large sums, which seek a secure
revenue, either by the purchase of land or by interest; and consequently the same
effect follows, for a little time, as if there had been a great accession of industry and
commerce. The encrease of lenders above the borrowers sinks the interest; and so
much the faster, if those, who have acquired those large sums, find no industry or
commerce in the state, and no method of employing their money but by lending it at
interest. But after this new mass of gold and silver has been digested, and has
circulated through the whole state, affairs will soon return to their former situation;
while the landlords and new money-holders, living idly, squander above their income;
and the former daily contract debt, and the latter encroach on their stock till its final
extinction. The whole money may still be in the state, and make itself felt by the
encrease of prices: But not being now collected into any large masses or stocks, the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 182 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
disproportion between the borrowers and lenders is the same as formerly, and
consequently the high interest returns.
Accordingly we find, in Rome, that, so early as Tiberius’s time, interest had again
mounted to 6 per cent.5 though no accident had happened to drain the empire of
money. In Trajan’s time, money lent on mortgages in Italy, bore 6 per cent.;6 on
common securities in Bithynia, 12.7 And if interest in Spain has not risen to its old
pitch; this can be ascribed to nothing but the continuance of the same cause that sunk
it, to wit, the large fortunes continually made in the Indies, which come over to Spain
from time to time, and supply the demand of the borrowers. By this accidental and
extraneous cause, more money is to be lent in Spain, that is, more money is collected
into large sums than would otherwise be found in a state, where there are so little
commerce and industry.
As to the reduction of interest, which has followed in England, France, and other
kingdoms of Europe, that have no mines, it has been gradual; and has not proceeded
from the encrease of money, considered merely in itself; but from that of industry,
which is the natural effect of the former encrease, in that interval, before it raises the
price of labour and provisions. For to return to the foregoing supposition; if the
industry of England had risen as much from other causes, (and that rise might easily
have happened, though the stock of money had remained the same) must not all the
same consequences have followed, which we observe at present? The same people
would, in that case, be found in the kingdom, the same commodities, the same
industry, manufactures, and commerce; and consequently the same merchants, with
the same stocks, that is, with the same command over labour and commodities, only
represented by a smaller number of white or yellow pieces; which being a
circumstance of no moment, would only affect the waggoner, porter, and trunkmaker.
Luxury, therefore, manufactures, arts, industry, frugality, flourishing equally
as at present, it is evident, that interest must also have been as low; since that is the
necessary result of all these circumstances; so far as they determine the profits of
commerce, and the proportion between the borrowers and lenders in any state.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 183 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY V
OF THE BALANCE OF TRADE
It is very usual, in nations ignorant of the nature of commerce, to prohibit the
exportation of commodities, and to preserve among themselves whatever they think
valuable and useful. They do not consider, that, in this prohibition, they act directly
contrary to their intention; and that the more is exported of any commodity, the more
will be raised at home, of which they themselves will always have the first offer.°
It is well known to the learned, that the ancient laws of Athens rendered the
exportation of figs criminal; that being supposed a species of fruit so excellent in
Attica, that the Athenians deemed it too delicious for the palate of any foreigner. And
in this ridiculous prohibition they were so much in earnest, that informers were thence
called sycophants among them, from two Greek words, which signify figs and
discoverer.1
,
a There are proofs in many old acts of parliament of the same ignorance
in the nature of commerce, particularly in the reign of Edward III.2 And to this day, in
France, the exportation of corn is almost always prohibited; in order, as they say, to
prevent famines; though it is evident, that nothing contributes more to the frequent
famines, which so much distress that fertile country.
The same jealous fear, with regard to money, has also prevailed among several
nations; and it required both reason and experience to convince any people, that these
prohibitions serve to no other purpose than to raise the exchange against them, and
produce a still greater exportation.3
These errors, one may say, are gross and palpable: But there still prevails, even in
nations well acquainted with commerce, a strong jealousy with regard to the balance
of trade, and a fear, that all their gold and silver may be leaving them. This seems to
me, almost in every case, a groundless apprehension; and I should as soon dread, that
all our springs and rivers should be exhausted, as that money should abandon a
kingdom where there are people and industry. Let us carefully preserve these latter
advantages; and we need never be apprehensive of losing the former.
It is easy to observe, that all calculations concerning the balance of trade are founded
on very uncertain facts and suppositions. The custom-house books are allowed to be
an insufficient ground of reasoning; nor is the rate of exchange much better; unless we
consider it with all nations, and know also the proportions of the several sums
remitted; which one may safely pronounce impossible. Every man, who has ever
reasoned on this subject, has always proved his theory, whatever it was, by facts and
calculations, and by an enumeration of all the commodities sent to all foreign
kingdoms.
The writings of Mr. Gee struck the nation with an universal panic, when they saw it
plainly demonstrated, by a detail of particulars, that the balance was against them for
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 184 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
so considerable a sum as must leave them without a single shilling in five or six
years.4 But luckily, twenty years have since elapsed, with an expensive foreign war;
yet is it commonly supposed, that money is still more plentiful among us than in any
former period.
Nothing can be more entertaining on this head than Dr. Swift; an authorb so quick in
discerning the mistakes and absurdities of others. He says, in his short view of the
state ofIreland, that the whole cash of that kingdom formerly amounted but to 500,000
l.; that out of this the Irish remitted every year a neat million to England, and had
scarcely any other source from which they could compensate themselves, and little
other foreign trade than the importation of French wines, for which they paid ready
money.5 The consequence of this situation, which must be owned to be
disadvantageous, was, that, in a course of three years, the current money of Ireland,
from 500,000 l. was reduced to less than two. And at present, I suppose, in a course of
30 years it is absolutely nothing. Yet I know not how, that opinion of the advance of
riches in Ireland, which gave the Doctor so much indignation, seems still to continue,
and gain ground with every body.
In short, this apprehension of the wrong balance of trade, appears of such a nature,
that it discovers itself, wherever one is out of humour with the ministry, or is in low
spirits; and as it can never be refuted by a particular detail of all the exports, which
counterbalance the imports, it may here be proper to form a general argument, that
may prove the impossibility of this event, as long as we preserve our people and our
industry.
Suppose four-fifths of all the money in Great Britain to be annihilated in one night,
and the nation reduced to the same condition, with regard to specie, as in the reigns of
the Harrys and Edwards,6 what would be the consequence? Must not the price of all
labour and commodities sink in proportion, and every thing be sold as cheap as they
were in those ages? What nation could then dispute with us in any foreign market, or
pretend to navigate or to sell manufactures at the same price, which to us would afford
sufficient profit? In how little time, therefore, must this bring back the money which
we had lost, and raise us to the level of all the neighbouring nations? Where, after we
have arrived, we immediately lose the advantage of the cheapness of labour and
commodities; and the farther flowing in of money is stopped by our fulness and
repletion.°
Again, suppose, that all the money of Great Britain were multiplied fivefold in a
night, must not the contrary effect follow? Must not all labour and commodities rise
to such an exorbitant height, that no neighbouring nations could afford to buy from
us; while their commodities, on the other hand, became comparatively so cheap, that,
in spite of all the laws which could be formed, they would be run in upon us, and our
money flow out; till we fall to a level with foreigners, and lose that great superiority
of riches, which had laid us under such disadvantages?
Now, it is evident, that the same causes, which would correct these exorbitant
inequalities, were they to happen miraculously, must prevent their happening in the
common course of nature, and must for ever, in all neighbouring nations, preserve
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 185 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
money nearly proportionable to the art and industry of each nation. All water,
wherever it communicates, remains always at a level. Ask naturalists the reason; they
tell you, that, were it to be raised in any one place, the superior gravity of that part not
being balanced, must depress it, till it meet a counterpoise; and that the same cause,
which redresses the inequality when it happens, must for ever prevent it, without
some violent external operation.7
Can one imagine, that it had ever been possible, by any laws, or even by any art or
industry, to have kept all the money in Spain, which the galleons have brought from
the Indies? Or that all commodities could be sold in France for a tenth of the price
which they would yield on the other side of the Pyrenees, without finding their way
thither, and draining from that immense treasure? What other reason, indeed, is there,
why all nations, at present, gain in their trade with Spain and Portugal; but because it
is impossible to heap up money, more than any fluid, beyond its proper level? The
sovereigns of these countries have shown, that they wanted not inclination to keep
their gold and silver to themselves, had it been in any degree practicable.
But as any body of water may be raised above the level of the surrounding element, if
the former has no communication with the latter; so in money, if the communication
be cut off, by any material or physical impediment, (for all laws alone are ineffectual)
there may, in such a case, be a very great inequality of money. Thus the immense
distance of China, together with the monopolies of our India companies, obstructing
the communication, preserve in Europe the gold and silver, especially the latter, in
much greater plenty than they are found in that kingdom.8 But, notwithstanding this
great obstruction, the force of the causes abovementioned is still evident. The skill
and ingenuity of Europe in general surpasses perhaps that of China, with regard to
manual arts and manufactures; yet are we never able to trade thither without great
disadvantage. And were it not for the continual recruits,° which we receive from
America, money would soon sink in Europe, and rise in China, till it came nearly to a
level in both places. Nor can any reasonable man doubt, but that industrious nation,
were they as near us as Poland or Barbary, would drain us of the overplus of our
specie, and draw to themselves a larger share of the West Indian treasures. We need
not have recourse to a physical attraction, in order to explain the necessity of this
operation. There is a moral attraction, arising from the interests and passions of men,
which is full as potent and infallible.
How is the balance kept in the provinces of every kingdom among themselves, but by
the force of this principle, which makes it impossible for money to lose its level, and
either to rise or sink beyond the proportion of the labour and commodities which are
in each province? Did not long experience make people easy on this head, what a fund
of gloomy reflections might calculations afford to a melancholy Yorkshireman, while
he computed and magnified the sums drawn to London by taxes, absentees,°
commodities, and found on comparison the opposite articles so much inferior? And
no doubt, had the Heptarchy subsisted in England,9 the legislature of each state had
been continually alarmed by the fear of a wrong balance; and as it is probable that the
mutual hatred of these states would have been extremely violent on account of their
close neighbourhood, they would have loaded and oppressed all commerce, by a
jealous and superfluous caution. Since the union has removed the barriers between
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 186 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Scotland and England, which of these nations gains from the other by this free
commerce? Or if the former kingdom has received any encrease of riches, can it
reasonably be accounted for by any thing but the encrease of its art and industry? It
was a common apprehension in England, before the union, as we learn from L’abbe
du Bos,10 that Scotland would soon drain them of their treasure, were an open trade
allowed; and on the other side the Tweed a contrary apprehension prevailed: With
what justice in both, time has shown.
What happens in small portions of mankind, must take place in greater. The provinces
of the Roman empire, no doubt, kept their balance with each other, and with Italy,
independent of the legislature; as much as the several counties of Great Britain, or the
several parishes of each county. And any man who travels over Europe at this day,
may see, by the prices of commodities, that money, in spite of the absurd jealousy of
princes and states, has brought itself nearly to a level; and that the difference between
one kingdom and another is not greater in this respect, than it is often between
different provinces of the same kingdom. Men naturally flock to capital cities, seaports,
and navigable rivers. There we find more men, more industry, more
commodities, and consequently more money; but still the latter difference holds
proportion with the former, and the level is preserved.11
Our jealousy and our hatred of France are without bounds; and the former sentiment,
at least, must be acknowledged reasonable and well-grounded. These passions have
occasioned innumerable barriers and obstructions upon commerce, where we are
accused of being commonly the aggressors. But what have we gained by the bargain?
We lost the French market for our woollen manufactures, and transferred the
commerce of wine to Spain and Portugal, where we buy worse liquor at a higher
price. There are few Englishmen who would not think their country absolutely ruined,
were French wines sold in England so cheap and in such abundance as to supplant, in
some measure, all ale, and home-brewed liquors: But would we lay aside prejudice, it
would not be difficult to prove, that nothing could be more innocent, perhaps
advantageous. Each new acre of vineyard planted in France, in order to supply
England with wine, would make it requisite for the French to take the produce of an
English acre, sown in wheat or barley, in order to subsist themselves; and it is evident,
that we should thereby get command of the better commodity.
There are many edicts of the French king, prohibiting the planting of new vineyards,
and ordering all those which are lately planted to be grubbed up: So sensible are they,
in that country, of the superior value of corn, above every other product.
Mareschal Vauban complains often, and with reason, of the absurd duties which load
the entry of those wines of Languedoc, Guienne, and other southern provinces, that
are imported into Britanny and Normandy.12 He entertained no doubt but these latter
provinces could preserve their balance, notwithstanding the open commerce which he
recommends. And it is evident, that a few leagues more navigation to England would
make no difference; or if it did, that it must operate alike on the commodities of both
kingdoms.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 187 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
There is indeed one expedient by which it is possible to sink, and another by which
we may raise money beyond its natural level in any kingdom; but these cases, when
examined, will be found to resolve into our general theory, and to bring additional
authority to it.
I scarcely know any method of sinking money below its level, but those institutions of
banks, funds, and paper-credit, c which are so much practised in this kingdom. These
render paper equivalent to money, circulate it throughout the whole state, make it
supply the place of gold and silver, raise proportionably the price of labour and
commodities, and by that means either banish a great part of those precious metals, or
prevent their farther encrease. What can be more shortsighted than our reasonings on
this head? We fancy, because an individual would be much richer, were his stock of
money doubled, that the same good effect would follow were the money of every one
encreased; not considering, that this would raise as much the price of every
commodity, and reduce every man, in time, to the same condition as before. It is only
in our public negociations and transactions with foreigners, that a greater stock of
money is advantageous; and as our paper is there absolutely insignificant, we feel, by
its means, all the ill effects arising from a great abundance of money, without reaping
any of the advantages.13
Suppose that there are 12 millions of paper, which circulate in the kingdom as money,
(for we are not to imagine, that all our enormous funds are employed in that shape)
and suppose the real cash of the kingdom to be 18 millions: Here is a state which is
found by experience to be able to hold a stock of 30 millions. I say, if it be able to
hold it, it must of necessity have acquired it in gold and silver, had we not obstructed
the entrance of these metals by this new invention of paper. Whence would it have
acquired that sum? From all the kingdoms of the world. But why? Because, if you
remove these 12 millions, money in this state is below its level, compared with our
neighbours; and we must immediately draw from all of them, till we be full and
saturate, so to speak, and can hold no more. By our present politics, we are as careful
to stuff the nation with this fine commodity of bank-bills and chequer-notes, as if we
were afraid of being overburthened with the precious metals.
It is not to be doubted, but the great plenty of bullion in France is, in a great measure,
owing to the want of paper-credit. The French have no banks: Merchants bills do not
there circulate as with us: Usury or lending on interest is not directly permitted; so
that many have large sums in their coffers: Great quantities of plate° are used in
private houses; and all the churches are full of it. By this means, provisions and labour
still remain cheaper among them, than in nations that are not half so rich in gold and
silver. The advantages of this situation, in point of trade as well as in great public
emergencies, are too evident to be disputed.
The same fashion a few years ago prevailed in Genoa, which still has place in
England and Holland, of using services of China-ware instead of plate; but the senate,
foreseeing the consequence, prohibited the use of that brittle commodity beyond a
certain extent; while the use of silver-plate was left unlimited. And I suppose, in their
late distresses, they felt the good effect of this ordinance. Our tax on plate is, perhaps,
in this view, somewhat impolitic.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 188 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Before the introduction of paper-money into our colonies, they had gold and silver
sufficient for their circulation. Since the introduction of that commodity, the least
inconveniency that has followed is the total banishment of the precious metals. And
after the abolition of paper, can it be doubted but money will return, while these
colonies possess manufactures and commodities, the only thing valuable in
commerce, and for whose sake alone all men desire money.
What pity Lycurgus did not think of paper-credit, when he wanted to banish gold and
silver from Sparta! It would have served his purpose better than the lumps of iron he
made use of as money; and would also have prevented more effectually all commerce
with strangers, as being of so much less real and intrinsic value.14
d It must, however, be confessed, that, as all these questions of trade and money are
extremely complicated, there are certain lights, in which this subject may be placed,
so as to represent the advantages of paper-credit and banks to be superior to their
disadvantages. That they banish specie and bullion from a state is undoubtedly true;
and whoever looks no farther than this circumstance does well to condemn them; but
specie and bullion are not of so great consequence as not to admit of a compensation,
and even an overbalance from the encrease of industry and of credit, which may be
promoted by the right use of paper-money. It is well known of what advantage it is to
a merchant to be able to discount his bills upon occasion; and every thing that
facilitates this species of traffic is favourable to the general commerce of a state. But
private bankers are enabled to give such credit by the credit they receive from the
depositing of money in their shops; and the bank of England in the same manner,
from the liberty it has to issue its notes in all payments. There was an invention of this
kind, which was fallen upon some years ago by the banks of Edinburgh; and which, as
it is one of the most ingenious ideas that has been executed in commerce, has also
been thought advantageous to Scotland. It is there called a Bank-Credit; and is of this
nature. A man goes to the bank and finds surety° to the amount, we shall suppose, of a
thousand pounds. This money, or any part of it, he has the liberty of drawing out
whenever he pleases, and he pays only the ordinary interest for it, while it is in his
hands. He may, when he pleases, repay any sum so small as twenty pounds, and the
interest is discounted from the very day of the repayment. The advantages, resulting
from this contrivance, are manifold. As a man may find surety nearly to the amount of
his substance, and his bank-credit is equivalent to ready money, a merchant does
hereby in a manner coin his houses, his household furniture, the goods in his
warehouse, the foreign debts due to him, his ships at sea; and can, upon occasion,
employ them in all payments, as if they were the current money of the country. If a
man borrow a thousand pounds from a private hand, besides that it is not always to be
found when required, he pays interest for it, whether he be using it or not: His bankcredit
costs him nothing except during the very moment, in which it is of service to
him: And this circumstance is of equal advantage as if he had borrowed money at
much lower interest. Merchants, likewise, from this invention, acquire a great facility
in supporting each other’s credit, which is a considerable security against
bankruptcies. A man, when his own bank-credit is exhausted, goes to any of his
neighbours who is not in the same condition; and he gets the money, which he
replaces at his convenience.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 189 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
e After this practice had taken place during some years at Edinburgh, several
companies of merchants at Glasgow carried the matter farther. They associated
themselves into different banks, and issued notes so low as ten shillings, which they
used in all payments for goods, manufactures, tradesmen’s labour of all kinds; and
these notes, from the established credit of the companies, passed as money in all
payments throughout the country. By this means, a stock of five thousand pounds was
able to perform the same operations as if it were six or seven; and merchants were
thereby enabled to trade to a greater extent, and to require less profit in all their
transactions. But whatever other advantages result from these inventions, it must still
be allowed that, besides giving too great facility to credit, which is dangerous, they
banish the precious metals; and nothing can be a more evident proof of it, than a
comparison of the past and present condition of Scotland in that particular. It was
found, upon the recoinage made after the union, that there was near a million of
specie in that country: But notwithstanding the great encrease of riches, commerce
and manufactures of all kinds, it is thought, that, even where there is no extraordinary
drain made by England, the current specie will not now amount to a third of that sum.
f But as our projects of paper-credit are almost the only expedient, by which we can
sink money below its level; so, in my opinion, the only expedient, by which we can
raise money above it, is a practice which we should all exclaim against as destructive,
namely, the gathering of large sums into a public treasure, locking them up, and
absolutely preventing their circulation. The fluid, not communicating with the
neighbouring element, may, by such an artifice, be raised to what height we please.
To prove this, we need only return to our first supposition, of annihilating the half or
any part of our cash; where we found, that the immediate consequence of such an
event would be the attraction of an equal sum from all the neighbouring kingdoms.
Nor does there seem to be any necessary bounds set, by the nature of things, to this
practice of hoarding. A small city, like Geneva, continuing this policy for ages, might
engross nine-tenths of the money of Europe. There seems, indeed, in the nature of
man, an invincible obstacle to that immense growth of riches. A weak state, with an
enormous treasure, will soon become a prey to some of its poorer, but more powerful
neighbours. A great state would dissipate its wealth in dangerous and ill-concerted
projects; and probably destroy, with it, what is much more valuable, the industry,
morals, and numbers of its people. The fluid, in this case, raised to too great a height,
bursts and destroys the vessel that contains it; and mixing itself with the surrounding
element, soon falls to its proper level.
So little are we commonly acquainted with this principle, that, though all historians
agree in relating uniformly so recent an event, as the immense treasure amassed by
Harry VII. (which they make amount to g 2,700,000 pounds,) we rather reject their
concurring testimony, than admit of a fact, which agrees so ill with our inveterate
prejudices. It is indeed probable, that this sum might be three-fourths of all the money
in England. But where is the difficulty in conceiving, that such a sum might be
amassed in twenty years, by a cunning, rapacious, frugal, and almost absolute
monarch? Nor is it probable, that the diminution of circulating money was ever
sensibly felt by the people, or ever did them any prejudice. The sinking of the prices
of all commodities would immediately replace it, by giving England the advantage in
its commerce with the neighbouring kingdoms.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 190 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Have we not an instance, in the small republic of Athens with its allies, who, in about
fifty years, between the Median and Peloponnesian wars, amassed h a sum not much
inferior to that of Harry VII.? For all the Greek historians15 and orators16 agree, that
the Athenians collected in the citadel more than 10,000 talents, which they afterwards
dissipated to their own ruin, in rash and imprudent enterprizes. But when this money
was set a running, and began to communicate with the surrounding fluid; what was
the consequence? Did it remain in the state? No. For we find, by the memorable
census mentioned by Demosthenes17 and Polybius,18 that, in about fifty years
afterwards, the whole value of the republic, comprehending lands, houses,
commodities, slaves, and money, was less than 6000 talents.
What an ambitious high-spirited people was this, to collect and keep in their treasury,
with a view to conquests, a sum, which it was every day in the power of the citizens,
by a single vote, to distribute among themselves, and which would have gone near to
triple the riches of every individual! For we must observe, that the numbers and
private riches of the Athenians are said, by ancient writers, to have been no greater at
the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, than at the beginning of the Macedonian.
Money was little more plentiful in Greece during the age of Philip and Perseus, than
in England during that of Harry VII.: Yet these two monarchs in thirty years19
collected from the small kingdom of Macedon, a larger treasure than that of the
English monarch. Paulus Æmilius brought to Rome about 1,700,000 pounds
Sterling.20Pliny says, 2,400,000.21 And that was but a part of the Macedonian
treasure. The rest was dissipated by the resistance and flight of Perseus.22
We may learn from Stanian, that the canton of Berne had 300,000 pounds lent at
interest, and had above six times as much in their treasury. Here then is a sum hoarded
of 1,800,000 pounds Sterling, which is at least quadruple what should naturally
circulate in such a petty state; and yet no one, who travels in the Pais de Vaux, or any
part of that canton, observes any want of money more than could be supposed in a
country of that extent, soil, and situation. On the contrary, there are scarce any inland
provinces in the continent of France or Germany, where the inhabitants are at this
time so opulent, though that canton has vastly encreased its treasure since 1714, the
time when Stanian wrote his judicious account of Switzerland.23
The account given by Appian24 of the treasure of the Ptolemies, is so prodigious, that
one cannot admit of it; and so much the less, because the historian says, that the other
successors of Alexander were also frugal, and had many of them treasures not much
inferior. For this saving humour of the neighbouring princes must necessarily have
checked the frugality of the Egyptian monarchs, according to the foregoing theory.
The sum he mentions is 740,000 talents, or 191,166,666 pounds 13 shillings and 4
pence, according to Dr. Arbuthnot’s computation. And yet Appian says, that he
extracted his account from the public records; and he was himself a native of
Alexandria.
From these principles we may learn what judgment we ought to form of those
numberless bars, obstructions, and imposts, which all nations of Europe, and none
more than England, have put upon trade; from an exorbitant desire of amassing
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 191 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
money, which never will heap up beyond its level, while it circulates; or from an illgrounded
apprehension of losing their specie, which never will sink below it. Could
any thing scatter our riches, it would be such impolitic contrivances. But this general
ill effect, however, results from them, that they deprive neighbouring nations of that
free communication and exchange which the Author of the world has intended, by
giving them soils, climates, and geniuses, so different from each other.
Our modern politics embrace the only method of banishing money, the using of
paper-credit; they reject the only method of amassing it, the practice of hoarding; and
they adopt a hundred contrivances, which serve to no purpose but to check industry,
and rob ourselves and our neighbours of the common benefits of art and nature.
All taxes, however, upon foreign commodities, are not to be regarded as prejudicial or
useless, but those only which are founded on the jealousy above-mentioned. A tax on
German linen encourages home manufactures, and thereby multiplies our people and
industry. A tax on brandy encreases the sale of rum, and supports our southern
colonies. And as it is necessary, that imposts should be levied, for the support of
government, it may be thought more convenient to lay them on foreign commodities,
which can easily be intercepted at the port, and subjected to the impost. We ought,
however, always to remember the maxim of Dr. Swift, That, in the arithmetic of the
customs, two and two make not four, but often make only one.25 It can scarcely be
doubted, but if the duties on wine were lowered to a third, they would yield much
more to the government than at present: Our people might thereby afford to drink
commonly a better and more wholesome liquor; and no prejudice would ensue to the
balance of trade, of which we are so jealous. The manufacture of ale beyond the
agriculture is but inconsiderable, and gives employment to few hands. The transport
of wine and corn would not be much inferior.
But are there not frequent instances, you will say, of states and kingdoms, which were
formerly rich and opulent, and are now poor and beggarly? Has not the money left
them, with which they formerly abounded? I answer, If they lose their trade, industry,
and people, they cannot expect to keep their gold and silver: For these precious metals
will hold proportion to the former advantages. When Lisbon and Amsterdam got the
East-India trade from Venice and Genoa, they also got the profits and money which
arose from it. Where the seat of government is transferred, where expensive armies
are maintained at a distance, where great funds are possessed by foreigners; there
naturally follows from these causes a diminution of the specie. But these, we may
observe, are violent and forcible methods of carrying away money, and are in time
commonly attended with the transport of people and industry. But where these
remain, and the drain is not continued, the money always finds its way back again, by
a hundred canals, of which we have no notion or suspicion. What immense treasures
have been spent, by so many nations, in Flanders, since the revolution, in the course
of three long wars?26 More money perhaps than the half of what is at present in
Europe. But what has now become of it? Is it in the narrow compass of the Austrian
provinces? No, surely: It has most of it returned to the several countries whence it
came, and has followed that art and industry, by which at first it was acquired. i For
above a thousand years, the money of Europe has been flowing to Rome, by an open
and sensible current; but it has been emptied by many secret and insensible canals:
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 192 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
And the want of industry and commerce renders at present the papal dominions the
poorest territory in all Italy.
In short, a government has great reason to preserve with care its people and its
manufactures. Its money, it may safely trust to the course of human affairs, without
fear or jealousy. Or if it ever give attention to this latter circumstance, it ought only to
be so far as it affects the former.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 193 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VI
OF THE JEALOUSY OF TRADE
Having endeavoured to remove one species of ill-founded jealousy, which is so
prevalent among commercial nations, it may not be amiss to mention another, which
seems equally groundless.1 Nothing is more usual, among states which have made
some advances in commerce, than to look on the progress of their neighbours with a
suspicious eye, to consider all trading states as their rivals, and to suppose that it is
impossible for any of them to flourish, but at their expence. In opposition to this
narrow and malignant opinion, I will venture to assert, that the encrease of riches and
commerce in any one nation, instead of hurting, commonly promotes the riches and
commerce of all its neighbours; and that a state can scarcely carry its trade and
industry very far, where all the surrounding states are buried in ignorance, sloth, and
barbarism.
It is obvious, that the domestic industry of a people cannot be hurt by the greatest
prosperity of their neighbours; and as this branch of commerce is undoubtedly the
most important in any extensive kingdom, we are so far removed from all reason of
jealousy. But I go farther, and observe, that where an open communication is
preserved among nations, it is impossible but the domestic industry of every one must
receive an encrease from the improvements of the others. Compare the situation of
Great Britain at present, with what it was two centuries ago. All the arts both of
agriculture and manufactures were then extremely rude and imperfect. Every
improvement, which we have since made, has arisen from our imitation of foreigners;
and we ought so far to esteem it happy, that they had previously made advances in
arts and ingenuity. But this intercourse is still upheld to our great advantage:
Notwithstanding the advanced state of our manufactures, we daily adopt, in every art,
the inventions and improvements of our neighbours. The commodity is first imported
from abroad, to our great discontent, while we imagine that it drains us of our money:
Afterwards, the art itself is gradually imported, to our visible advantage: Yet we
continue still to repine,° that our neighbours should possess any art, industry, and
invention; forgetting that, had they not first instructed us, we should have been at
present barbarians; and did they not still continue their instructions, the arts must fall
into a state of languor, and lose that emulation and novelty, which contribute so much
to their advancement.
The encrease of domestic industry lays the foundation of foreign commerce. Where a
great number of commodities are raised and perfected for the home-market, there will
always be found some which can be exported with advantage. But if our neighbours
have no art or cultivation, they cannot take them; because they will have nothing to
give in exchange. In this respect, states are in the same condition as individuals. A
single man can scarcely be industrious, where all his fellow-citizens are idle. The
riches of the several members of a community contribute to encrease my riches,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 194 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
whatever profession I may follow. They consume the produce of my industry, and
afford me the produce of theirs in return.
Nor needs any state entertain apprehensions, that their neighbours will improve to
such a degree in every art and manufacture, as to have no demand from them. Nature,
by giving a diversity of geniuses, climates, and soils, to different nations, has secured
their mutual intercourse and commerce, as long as they all remain industrious and
civilized. Nay, the more the arts encrease in any state, the more will be its demands
from its industrious neighbours. The inhabitants, having become opulent and skilful,
desire to have every commodity in the utmost perfection; and as they have plenty of
commodities to give in exchange, they make large importations from every foreign
country. The industry of the nations, from whom they import, receives
encouragement: Their own is also encreased, by the sale of the commodities which
they give in exchange.
But what if a nation has any staple commodity, such as the woollen manufacture is in
England? Must not the interfering of our neighbours in that manufacture be a loss to
us? I answer, that, when any commodity is denominated the staple of a kingdom, it is
supposed that this kingdom has some peculiar and natural advantages for raising the
commodity; and if, notwithstanding these advantages, they lose such a manufacture,
they ought to blame their own idleness, or bad government, not the industry of their
neighbours. It ought also to be considered, that, by the encrease of industry among the
neighbouring nations, the consumption of every particular species of commodity is
also encreased; and though foreign manufactures interfere with them in the market,
the demand for their product may still continue, or even encrease. And should it
diminish, ought the consequence to be esteemed so fatal? If the spirit of industry be
preserved, it may easily be diverted from one branch to another; and the
manufacturers of wool, for instance, be employed in linen, silk, iron, or any other
commodities, for which there appears to be a demand. We need not apprehend, that
all the objects of industry will be exhausted, or that our manufacturers, while they
remain on an equal footing with those of our neighbours, will be in danger of wanting
employment. The emulation among rival nations serves rather to keep industry alive
in all of them: And any people is happier who possess a variety of manufactures, than
if they enjoyed one single great manufacture, in which they are all employed. Their
situation is less precarious; and they will feel less sensibly those revolutions and
uncertainties, to which every particular branch of commerce will always be exposed.
The only commercial state, that ought to dread the improvements and industry of their
neighbours, is such a one as the Dutch, who enjoying no extent of land, nor
possessing any number of native commodities, flourish only by their being the
brokers, and factors,° and carriers of others. Such a people may naturally apprehend,
that, as soon as the neighbouring states come to know and pursue their interest, they
will take into their own hands the management of their affairs, and deprive their
brokers of that profit, which they formerly reaped from it. But though this
consequence may naturally be dreaded, it is very long before it takes place; and by art
and industry it may be warded off for many generations, if not wholly eluded. The
advantage of superior stocks and correspondence is so great, that it is not easily
overcome; and as all the transactions encrease by the encrease of industry in the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 195 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
neighbouring states, even a people whose commerce stands on this precarious basis,
may at first reap a considerable profit from the flourishing condition of their
neighbours. The Dutch, having mortgaged all their revenues, make not such a figure
in political transactions as formerly; but their commerce is surely equal to what it was
in the middle of the last century, when they were reckoned among the great powers of
Europe.
Were our narrow and malignant politics to meet with success, we should reduce all
our neighbouring nations to the same state of sloth and ignorance that prevails in
Morocco and the coast of Barbary. But what would be the consequence? They could
send us no commodities: They could take none from us: Our domestic commerce
itself would languish for want of emulation, example, and instruction: And we
ourselves should soon fall into the same abject condition, to which we had reduced
them. I shall therefore venture to acknowledge, that, not only as a man, but as a
British subject, I pray for the flourishing commerce of Germany, Spain, Italy, and
even France itself. I am at least certain, that Great Britain, and all those nations,
would flourish more, did their sovereigns and ministers adopt such enlarged and
benevolent sentiments towards each other.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 196 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VII
OF THE BALANCE OF POWER
It is a question whether the idea of the balance of power be owing entirely to modern
policy, or whether the phrase only has been invented in these later ages? It is certain,
that Xenophon,1 in his Institution of Cyrus, represents the combination of the Asiatic
powers to have arisen from a jealousy of the encreasing force of the Medes and
Persians; and though that elegant composition should be supposed altogether a
romance,° this sentiment, ascribed by the author to the eastern princes, is at least a
proof of the prevailing notion of ancient times.
In all the politics of Greece, the anxiety, with regard to the balance of power, is
apparent, and is expressly pointed out to us, even by the ancient historians.
Thucydides2 represents the league, which was formed against Athens, and which
produced the Peloponnesian war, as entirely owing to this principle. And after the
decline of Athens, when the Thebans and Lacedemonians disputed for sovereignty,
we find, that the Athenians (as well as many other republics) always threw themselves
into the lighter scale, and endeavoured to preserve the balance. They supported
Thebes against Sparta, till the great victory gained by Epaminondas at Leuctra; after
which they immediately went over to the conquered, from generosity, as they
pretended, but in reality from their jealousy of the conquerors.3
Whoever will read Demosthenes’s oration for the Megalopolitans, may see the utmost
refinements on this principle, that ever entered into the head of a Venetian or English
speculatist.4 And upon the first rise of the Macedonian power, this orator immediately
discovered the danger, sounded the alarm throughout all Greece, and at last assembled
that confederacy under the banners of Athens, which fought the great and decisive
battle of Chaeronea.
It is true, the Grecian wars are regarded by historians as wars of emulation rather than
of politics; and each state seems to have had more in view the honour of leading the
rest, than any well-grounded hopes of authority and dominion. If we consider, indeed,
the small number of inhabitants in any one republic, compared to the whole, the great
difficulty of forming sieges in those times, and the extraordinary bravery and
discipline of every freeman among that noble people; we shall conclude, that the
balance of power was, of itself, sufficiently secured in Greece, and needed not to have
been guarded with that caution which may be requisite in other ages. But whether we
ascribe the shifting of sides in all the Grecian republics to jealous emulation or
cautious politics, the effects were alike, and every prevailing power was sure to meet
with a confederacy against it, and that often composed of its former friends and allies.
The same principle, call it envy or prudence, which produced the Ostracism of
Athens, and Petalism of Syracuse,5 and expelled every citizen whose fame or power
overtopped the rest; the same principle, I say, naturally discovered itself in foreign
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 197 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
politics, and soon raised enemies to the leading state, however moderate in the
exercise of its authority.
The Persian monarch was really, in his force, a petty prince, compared to the Grecian
republics; and therefore it behoved him, from views of safety more than from
emulation, to interest himself in their quarrels, and to support the weaker side in every
contest. This was the advice given by Alcibiades to Tissaphernes,6 and it prolonged
near a century the date of the Persian empire; till the neglect of it for a moment, after
the first appearance of the aspiring genius of Philip, brought that lofty and frail edifice
to the ground, with a rapidity of which there are few instances in the history of
mankind.
The successors of Alexander showed great jealousy of° the balance of power; a
jealousy founded on true politics and prudence, and which preserved distinct for
several ages the partition made after the death of that famous conqueror. The fortune
and ambition of Antigonus7 threatened them anew with a universal monarchy; but
their combination, and their victory at Ipsus saved them. And in subsequent times, we
find, that, as the Eastern princes considered the Greeks and Macedonians as the only
real military force, with whom they had any intercourse, they kept always a watchful
eye over that part of the world. The Ptolemies, in particular, supported first Aratus
and the Achaeans, and then Cleomenes king of Sparta, from no other view than as a
counterbalance to the Macedonian monarchs. For this is the account which Polybius
gives of the Egyptian politics.8
The reason, why it is supposed, that the ancients were entirely ignorant of the balance
of power, seems to be drawn from the Roman history more than the Grecian; and as
the transactions of the former are generally more familiar to us, we have thence
formed all our conclusions. It must be owned, that the Romans never met with any
such general combination or confederacy against them, as might naturally have been
expected from the rapid conquests and declared ambition; but were allowed peaceably
to subdue their neighbours, one after another, till they extended their dominion over
the whole known world. Not to mention the fabulous history of theiraItalic wars; there
was, upon Hannibal’s invasion of the Roman state, a remarkable crisis, which ought
to have called up the attention of all civilized nations. It appeared afterwards (nor was
it difficult to be observed at the time)9 that this was a contest for universal empire; yet
no prince or state seems to have been in the least alarmed about the event or issue of
the quarrel. Philip of Macedon remained neuter, till he saw the victories of Hannibal;
and then most imprudently formed an alliance with the conqueror, upon terms still
more imprudent. He stipulated, that he was to assist the Carthaginian state in their
conquest of Italy; after which they engaged to send over forces into Greece, to assist
him in subduing the Grecian commonwealths.10
The Rhodian and Achaean republics are much celebrated by ancient historians for
their wisdom and sound policy; yet both of them assisted the Romans in their wars
against Philip and Antiochus. And what may be esteemed still a stronger proof, that
this maxim was not generally known in those ages; no ancient author has remarked
the imprudence of these measures, nor has even blamed that absurd treaty abovementioned,
made by Philip with the Carthaginians. Princes and statesmen, in all ages,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 198 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
may, before-hand, be blinded in their reasonings with regard to events: But it is
somewhat extraordinary, that historians, afterwards, should not form a sounder
judgment of them.
Massinissa, Attalus, Prusias, in gratifying their private passions, were, all of them, the
instruments of the Roman greatness; and never seem to have suspected, that they were
forging their own chains, while they advanced the conquests of their ally.11 A simple
treaty and agreement between Massinissa and the Carthaginians, so much required by
mutual interest, barred° the Romans from all entrance into Africa, and preserved
liberty to mankind.
The only prince we meet with in the Roman history, who seems to have understood
the balance of power, is Hiero king of Syracuse. Though the ally of Rome, he sent
assistance to the Carthaginians, during the war of the auxiliaries; “Esteeming it
requisite,” says Polybius,12 “both in order to retain his dominions in Sicily, and to
preserve the Roman friendship, that Carthage should be safe; lest by its fall the
remaining power should be able, without contrast or opposition, to execute every
purpose and undertaking. And here he acted with great wisdom and prudence. For that
is never, on any account, to be overlooked; nor ought such a force ever to be thrown
into one hand, as to incapacitate the neighbouring states from defending their rights
against it.” Here is the aim of modern politics pointed out in express terms.
In short, the maxim of preserving the balance of power is founded so much on
common sense and obvious reasoning, that it is impossible it could altogether have
escaped antiquity, where we find, in other particulars, so many marks of deep
penetration and discernment. If it was not so generally known and acknowledged as at
present, it had, at least, an influence on all the wiser and more experienced princes
and politicians. And indeed, even at present, however generally known and
acknowledged among speculative reasoners, it has not, in practice, an authority much
more extensive among those who govern the world.
After the fall of the Roman empire, the form of government, established by the
northern conquerors, incapacitated them, in a great measure, for farther conquests,
and long maintained each state in its proper boundaries. But when vassalage and the
feudal militia were abolished, mankind were anew alarmed by the danger of universal
monarchy, from the union of so many kingdoms and principalities in the person of the
emperor Charles.13 But the power of the house of Austria, founded on extensive but
divided dominions, and their riches, derived chiefly from mines of gold and silver,
were more likely to decay, of themselves, from internal defects, than to overthrow all
the bulwarks raised against them. In less than a century, the force of that violent and
haughty race was shattered, their opulence dissipated, their splendor eclipsed. A new
power succeeded,14 more formidable to the liberties of Europe, possessing all the
advantages of the former, and labouring under none of its defects; except a share of
that spirit of bigotry and persecution, with which the house of Austria was so long,
and still is so much infatuated.
b In the general wars, maintained against this ambitious power, Great Britain has
stood foremost; and she still maintains her station. Beside her advantages of riches
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 199 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and situation, her people are animated with such a national spirit, and are so fully
sensible of the blessings of their government, that we may hope their vigour never
will languish in so necessary and so just a cause. On the contrary, if we may judge by
the past, their passionate ardour seems rather to require some moderation; and they
have oftener erred from a laudable excess than from a blameable deficiency.
In the first place, we seem to have been more possessed with the ancient Greek spirit
of jealous emulation, than actuated by the prudent views of modern politics. Our wars
with France have been begun with justice, and even, perhaps, from necessity; but have
always been too far pushed from obstinacy and passion. The same peace, which was
afterwards made at Ryswick in 1697, was offered so early as the year ninety-two; that
concluded at Utrecht in 1712 might have been finished on as good conditions at
Gertruytenberg in the year eight; and we might have given at Frankfort, in 1743, the
same terms, which we were glad to accept of at Aix-la-Chapelle in the year fortyeight.
Here then we see, that above half of our wars with France, and all our public
debts, are owing more to our own imprudent vehemence, than to the ambition of our
neighbours.
In the second place, we are so declared in our opposition to French power, and so alert
in defence of our allies, that they always reckon upon our force as upon their own;
and expecting to carry on war at our expence, refuse all reasonable terms of
accommodation. Habent subjectos, tanquam suos; viles, ut alienos.15 All the world
knows, that the factious vote of the House of Commons, in the beginning of the last
parliament, with the professed humour of the nation, made the queen of Hungary
inflexible in her terms, and prevented that agreement with Prussia, which would
immediately have restored the general tranquillity of Europe.16
In the third place, we are such true combatants, that, when once engaged, we lose all
concern for ourselves and our posterity, and consider only how we may best annoy
the enemy. To mortgage our revenues at so deep a rate, in wars, where we were only
accessories, was surely the most fatal delusion, that a nation, which had any
pretension to politics and prudence, has ever yet been guilty of. That remedy of
funding,° if it be a remedy, and not rather a poison, ought, in all reason, to be reserved
to the last extremity; and no evil, but the greatest and most urgent, should ever induce
us to embrace so dangerous an expedient.
These excesses, to which we have been carried, are prejudicial; and may, perhaps, in
time, become still more prejudicial another way, by begetting, as is usual, the opposite
extreme, and rendering us totally careless and supine° with regard to the fate of
Europe. The Athenians, from the most bustling, intriguing, warlike people of Greece,
finding their error in thrusting themselves into every quarrel, abandoned all attention
to foreign affairs; and in no contest ever took part on either side, except by their
flatteries and complaisance to the victor.
Enormous monarchiesc are, probably, destructive to human nature; in their progress,
in their continuance,17 and even in their downfal,° which never can be very distant
from their establishment. The military genius, which aggrandized the monarchy, soon
leaves the court, the capital, and the center of such a government; while the wars are
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 200 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
carried on at a great distance, and interest so small a part of the state. The ancient
nobility, whose affections attach them to their sovereign, live all at court; and never
will accept of military employments, which would carry them to remote and
barbarous frontiers, where they are distant both from their pleasures and their fortune.
The arms of the state, must, therefore, be entrusted to mercenary strangers, without
zeal, without attachment, without honour; ready on every occasion to turn them
against the prince, and join each desperate malcontent, who offers pay and plunder.
This is the necessary progress of human affairs: Thus human nature checks itself in its
airy elevation: Thus ambition blindly labours for the destruction of the conqueror, of
his family, and of every thing near and dear to him. The Bourbons, trusting to the
support of their brave, faithful, and affectionate nobility, would push their advantage,
without reserve or limitation.18 These, while fired with glory and emulation, can bear
the fatigues and dangers of war; but never would submit to languish in the garrisons
of Hungary or Lithuania, forgot at court, and sacrificed to the intrigues of every
minion or mistress, who approaches the prince. The troops are filled with Cravates
and Tartars, Hussars and Cossacs; intermingled, perhaps, with a few soldiers of
fortune from the better provinces: And the melancholy fate of the Roman emperors,
from the same cause, is renewed over and over again, till the final dissolution of the
monarchy.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 201 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VIII
OF TAXES
There is a prevailing maxim,a among some reasoners, that every new tax creates a
new ability in the subject to bear it, and that each encrease of public burdens
encreases proportionably the industry of the people. This maxim is of such a nature as
is most likely to be abused; and is so much the more dangerous, as its truth cannot be
altogether denied: but it must be owned, when kept within certain bounds, to have
some foundation in reason and experience.1
When a tax is laid upon commodities, which are consumed by the common people,
the necessary consequence may seem to be, either that the poor must retrench
something from their way of living, or raise their wages, so as to make the burden of
the tax fall entirely upon the rich. But there is a third consequence, which often
follows upon taxes, namely, that the poor encrease their industry, perform more work,
and live as well as before, without demanding more for their labour. Where taxes are
moderate, are laid on gradually, and affect not the necessaries of life, this
consequence naturally follows; and it is certain, that such difficulties often serve to
excite the industry of a people, and render them more opulent and laborious, than
others, who enjoy the greatest advantages. For we may observe, as a parallel instance,
that the most commercial nations have not always possessed the greatest extent of
fertile land; but, on the contrary, that they have laboured under many natural
disadvantages. Tyre, Athens, Carthage, Rhodes, Genoa, Venice, Holland, are strong
examples to this purpose. And in all history, we find only three instances of large and
fertile countries, which have possessed much trade; the Netherlands, England, and
France. The two former seem to have been allured by the advantages of their maritime
situation, and the necessity they lay under of frequenting foreign ports, in order to
procure what their own climate refused them. And as to France, trade has come late
into that kingdom, and seems to have been the effect of reflection and observation in
an ingenious and enterprizing people, who remarked the riches acquired by such of
the neighbouring nations as cultivated navigation and commerce.
The places mentioned by Cicero,2 as possessed of the greatest commerce in his time,
are Alexandria, Colchus, Tyre, Sidon, Andros, Cyprus, Pamphylia, Lycia, Rhodes,
Chios, Byzantium, Lesbos, Smyrna, Miletum, Coos. All these, except Alexandria,
were either small islands, or narrow territories. And that city owed its trade entirely to
the happiness of its situation.
Since therefore some natural necessities or disadvantages may be thought favourable
to industry, why may not artificial burdens have the same effect? Sir William
Temple,3 we may observe, ascribes the industry of the Dutch entirely to necessity,
proceeding from their natural disadvantages; and illustrates his doctrine by a striking
comparison with Ireland; “where,” says he, “by the largeness and plenty of the soil,
and scarcity of people, all things necessary to life are so cheap, that an industrious
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 202 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
man, by two days labour, may gain enough to feed him the rest of the week. Which I
take to be a very plain ground of the laziness attributed to the people. For men
naturally prefer ease before labour, and will not take pains if they can live idle; though
when, by necessity, they have been inured to it, they cannot leave it, being grown a
custom necessary to their health, and to their very entertainment. Nor perhaps is the
change harder, from constant ease to labour, than from constant labour to ease.” After
which the author proceeds to confirm his doctrine, by enumerating, as above, the
places where trade has most flourished, in ancient and modern times; and which are
commonly observed to be such narrow confined territories, as beget a necessity for
industry.b
The best taxes are such as are levied upon consumptions,4 especially those of luxury;
because such taxes are least felt by the people. They seem, in some measure,
voluntary; since a man may chuse how far he will use the commodity which is taxed:
They are paid gradually and insensibly:c They naturally produce sobriety and
frugality, if judiciously imposed: And being confounded with the natural price of the
commodity, they are scarcely perceived by the consumers. Their only disadvantage is,
that they are expensive in the levying.
Taxes upon possessions are levied without expence; but have every other
disadvantage. Most states, however, are obliged to have recourse to them, in order to
supply the deficiencies of the other.
But the most pernicious of all taxes are the arbitrary.5 They are commonly converted,
by their management, into punishments on industry; and also, by their unavoidable
inequality, are more grievous, than by the real burden which they impose. It is
surprising, therefore, to see them have place among any civilized people.
In general, all poll-taxes,6 even when not arbitrary, which they commonly are, may be
esteemed dangerous: Because it is so easy for the sovereign to add a little more, and a
little more, to the sum demanded, that these taxes are apt to become altogether
oppressive and intolerable. On the other hand, a duty upon commodities checks itself;
and a prince will soon find, that an encrease of the impost is no encrease of his
revenue. It is not easy, therefore, for a people to be altogether ruined by such taxes.
Historians inform us, that one of the chief causes of the destruction of the Roman
state, was the alteration, which Constantine introduced into the finances, by
substituting an universal poll-tax, in lieu of almost all the tithes, customs, and excises,
which formerly composed the revenue of the empire.7 The people, in all the
provinces, were so grinded and oppressed by the publicans, that they were glad to
take refuge under the conquering arms of the barbarians; whose dominion, as they had
fewer necessities and less art, was found preferable to the refined tyranny of the
Romans.
d It is an opinion, zealously promoted by some political writers, that, since all taxes,
as they pretend, fall ultimately upon land, it were better to lay them originally there,
and abolish every duty upon consumptions. But it is denied, that all taxes fall
ultimately upon land. If a duty be laid upon any commodity, consumed by an artisan,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 203 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
he has two obvious expedients for paying it; he may retrench somewhat of his
expence, or he may encrease his labour. Both these resources are more easy and
natural, than that of heightening his wages. We see, that, in years of scarcity, the
weaver either consumes less or labours more, or employs both these expedients of
frugality and industry, by which he is enabled to reach the end of the year. It is but
just, that he should subject himself to the same hardships, if they deserve the name,
for the sake of the publick, which gives him protection. By what contrivance can he
raise the price of his labour? The manufacturer who employs him, will not give him
more: Neither can he, because the merchant, who exports the cloth, cannot raise its
price, being limited by the price which it yields in foreign markets. Every man, to be
sure, is desirous of pushing off from himself the burden of any tax, which is imposed,
and of laying it upon others: But as every man has the same inclination, and is upon
the defensive; no set of men can be supposed to prevail altogether in this contest. And
why the landed gentleman should be the victim of the whole, and should not be able
to defend himself, as well as others are, I cannot readily imagine. All tradesmen,
indeed, would willingly prey upon him, and divide him among them, if they could:
But this inclination they always have, though no taxes were levied; and the same
methods, by which he guards against the imposition of tradesmen before taxes, will
serve him afterwards, and make them share the burden with him. e They must be very
heavy taxes, indeed, and very injudiciously levied, which the artizan will not, of
himself, be enabled to pay, by superior industry and frugality, without raising the
price of his labour.
I shall conclude this subject with observing, that we have, with regard to taxes, an
instance of what frequently happens in political institutions, that the consequences of
things are diametrically opposite to what we should expect on the first appearance. It
is regarded as a fundamental maxim of the Turkish government, that the Grand
Signior, though absolute master of the lives and fortunes of each individual, has no
authority to impose a new tax; and every Ottoman prince, who has made such an
attempt, either has been obliged to retract, or has found the fatal effects of his
perseverance. One would imagine, that this prejudice or established opinion were the
firmest barrier in the world against oppression; yet it is certain, that its effect is quite
contrary. The emperor, having no regular method of encreasing his revenue, must
allow all the bashaws and governors to oppress and abuse the subjects: And these he
squeezes after their return from their government. Whereas, if he could impose a new
tax, like our European princes, his interest would so far be united with that of his
people, that he would immediately feel the bad effects of these disorderly levies of
money, and would find, that a pound, raised by a general imposition, would have less
pernicious effects, than a shilling taken in so unequal and arbitrary a manner.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 204 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY IX
OF PUBLIC CREDIT
It appears to have been the common practice of antiquity, to make provision, during
peace, for the necessities of war, and to hoard up treasures before-hand, as the
instruments either of conquest or defence; without trusting to extraordinary
impositions, much less to borrowing, in times of disorder and confusion. Besides the
immense sums above mentioned,1 which were amassed by Athens, and by the
Ptolemies, and other successors of Alexander; we learn from Plato,2 that the frugal
Lacedemonians had also collected a great treasure; and Arrian3 and Plutarch4 take
notice of the riches which Alexander got possession of on the conquest of Susa and
Ecbatana, and which were reserved, some of them, from the time of Cyrus. If I
remember right, the scripture also mentions the treasure of Hezekiah and the Jewish
princes;5 as profane history does that of Philip and Perseus, kings of Macedon. The
ancient republics of Gaul had commonly large sums in reserve.6 Every one knows the
treasure seized in Rome by Julius Cæsar, during the civil wars:7 and we find
afterwards, that the wiser emperors, Augustus, Tiberius, Vespasian, Severus, &c.
always discovered the prudent foresight, of saving great sums against any public
exigency.
On the contrary, our modern expedient, which has become very general, is to
mortgage the public revenues, and to trust that posterity will pay off the incumbrances
contracted by their ancestors: And they, having before their eyes, so good an example
of their wise fathers, have the same prudent reliance on their posterity; who, at last,
from necessity more than choice, are obliged to place the same confidence in a new
posterity. But not to waste time in declaiming against a practice which appears
ruinous, a beyond all controversy; it seems pretty apparent, that the ancient maxims
are, in this respect, more prudent than the modern; even though the latter had been
confined within some reasonable bounds, and had ever, in any instance, been attended
with such frugality, in time of peace, as to discharge the debts incurred by an
expensive war. For why should the case be so different between the public and an
individual, as to make us establish different maxims of conduct for each? If the funds
of the former be greater, its necessary expences are proportionably larger; if its
resources be more numerous, they are not infinite; and as its frame should be
calculated for a much longer duration than the date of a single life, or even of a
family, it should embrace maxims, large, durable, and generous, agreeably to the
supposed extent of its existence. To trust to chances and temporary expedients, is,
indeed, what the necessity of human affairs frequently renders unavoidable; but
whoever voluntarily depend on such resources, have not necessity, but their own
folly, to accuse for their misfortunes, when any such befal them.8
If the abuses of treasures be dangerous, either by engaging the state in rash
enterprizes, or making it neglect military discipline, in confidence of its riches; the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 205 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
abuses of mortgaging are more certain and inevitable; poverty, impotence, and
subjection to foreign powers.
According to modern policy war is attended with every destructive circumstance; loss
of men, encrease of taxes, decay of commerce, dissipation of money, devastation by
sea and land. According to ancient maxims, the opening of the public treasure, as it
produced an uncommon affluence of gold and silver, served as a temporary
encouragement to industry, and atoned, in some degree, for the inevitable calamities
of war.
b It is very tempting to a minister to employ such an expedient, as enables him to
make a great figure during his administration, without overburthening the people with
taxes, or exciting any immediate clamours against himself. The practice, therefore, of
contracting debt will almost infallibly be abused, in every government. It would
scarcely be more imprudent to give a prodigal son a credit in every banker’s shop in
London, than to impower a statesman to draw bills, in this manner, upon posterity.
What then shall we say to the new paradox, that public incumbrances, are, of
themselves, advantageous, independent of the necessity of contracting them; and that
any state, even though it were not pressed by a foreign enemy, could not possibly
have embraced a wiser expedient for promoting commerce and riches, than to create
funds, and debts, and taxes, without limitation? Reasonings, such as these, might
naturally have passed for trials of wit among rhetoricians, like the panegyrics on folly
and a fever, on Busiris and Nero, had we not seen such absurd maxims patronized by
great ministers,9 and by a whole party among us.c
Let us examine the consequences of public debts, both in our domestic management,
by their influence on commerce and industry; and in our foreign transactions, by their
effect on wars and negociations.d
Public securities are with us become a kind of money, and pass as readily at the
current price as gold or silver. Wherever any profitable undertaking offers itself, how
expensive soever, there are never wanting hands enow to embrace it; nor need a
trader, who has sums in the public stocks, fear to launch out into the most extensive
trade; since he is possessed of funds, which will answer the most sudden demand that
can be made upon him. No merchant thinks it necessary to keep by him any
considerable cash. Bank-stock, or India-bonds,10 especially the latter, serve all the
same purposes; because he can dispose of them, or pledge them to a banker, in a
quarter of an hour; and at the same time they are not idle, even when in his scritoire,°
but bring him in a constant revenue. In short, our national debts furnish merchants
with a species of money, that is continually multiplying in their hands, and produces
sure gain, besides the profits of their commerce. This must enable them to trade upon
less profit. The small profit of the merchant renders the commodity cheaper, causes a
greater consumption, quickens the labour of the common people, and helps to spread
arts and industry throughout the whole society.
There are also, we may observe, in England and in all states, which have both
commerce and public debts, a set of men, who are half merchants, half stock-holders,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 206 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and may be supposed willing to trade for small profits; because commerce is not their
principal or sole support, and their revenues in the funds are a sure resource for
themselves and their families. Were there no funds, great merchants would have no
expedient for realizing or securing any part of their profit, but by making purchases of
land; and land has many disadvantages in comparison of funds. Requiring more care
and inspection, it divides the time and attention of the merchant; upon any tempting
offer or extraordinary accident in trade, it is not so easily converted into money; and
as it attracts too much, both by the many natural pleasures it affords, and the authority
it gives, it soon converts the citizen into the country gentleman. More men, therefore,
with large stocks and incomes, may naturally be supposed to continue in trade, where
there are public debts; and this, it must be owned, is of some advantage to commerce,
by diminishing its profits, promoting circulation, and encouraging industry.e
But, in opposition to these two favourable circumstances, perhaps of no very great
importance, weigh the many disadvantages which attend our public debts, in the
whole interior œconomy of the state: You will find no comparison between the ill and
the good which result from them.
First, It is certain, that national debts cause a mighty confluence of people and riches
to the capital, by the great sums, levied in the provinces to pay the interest; and
perhaps, too, by the advantages in trade above mentioned, which they give the
merchants in the capital above the rest of the kingdom. The question is, whether, in
our case, it be for the public interest, that so many privileges should be conferred on
London, which has already arrived at such an enormous size, and seems still
encreasing? Some men are apprehensive of the consequences. For my own part, I
cannot forbear thinking, that, though the head is undoubtedly too large for the body,
yet that great city is so happily situated, that its excessive bulk causes less
inconvenience than even a smaller capital to a greater kingdom. There is more
difference between the prices of all provisions in Paris and Languedoc, than between
those in London and Yorkshire. f The immense greatness, indeed, of London, under a
government which admits not of discretionary power, renders the people factious,
mutinous, seditious, and even perhaps rebellious. But to this evil the national debts
themselves tend to provide a remedy. The first visible eruption, or even immediate
danger, of public disorders must alarm all the stockholders, whose property is the
most precarious of any; and will make them fly to the support of government, whether
menaced by Jacobitish violence11 or democratical frenzy.
Secondly, Public stocks, being a kind of paper-credit, have all the disadvantages
attending that species of money. They banish gold and silver from the most
considerable commerce of the state, reduce them to common circulation, and by that
means render all provisions and labour dearer than otherwise they would be.g
Thirdly, The taxes, which are levied to pay the interests of these debts,h are apt either
to heighten the price of labour, or be an oppression on the poorer sort.
Fourthly, As foreigners possess a great share of our national funds, they render the
public, in a manner, tributary to them, and may in time occasion the transport of our
people and our industry.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 207 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Fifthly, The greater part of the public stock being always in the hands of idle people,
who live on their revenue, our funds, in that view, give great encouragement to an
useless and unactive life.
But though the injury, that arises to commerce and industry from our public funds,
will appear, upon balancing the whole, not inconsiderable, it is trivial, in comparison
of the prejudice that results to the state considered as a body politic, which must
support itself in the society of nations, and have various transactions with other states
in wars and negociations. The ill, there, is pure and unmixed, without any favourable
circumstance to atone for it; and it is an ill too of a nature the highest and most
important.
We have, indeed, been told, that the public is no weaker upon account of its debts;
since they are mostly due among ourselves, and bring as much property to one as they
take from another. It is like transferring money from the right hand to the left; which
leaves the person neither richer nor poorer than before.12 Such loose reasonings and
specious comparisons will always pass, where we judge not upon principles. I ask, Is
it possible, in the nature of things, to overburthen a nation with taxes, even where the
sovereign resides among them? The very doubt seems extravagant; since it is
requisite, in every community, that there be a certain proportion observed between the
laborious and the idle part of it. But if all our present taxes be mortgaged, must we not
invent new ones? And may not this matter be carried to a length that is ruinous and
destructive?
In every nation, there are always some methods of levying money more easy than
others, agreeably to the way of living of the people, and the commodities they make
use of. In Great Britain, the excises upon malt and beer afford a large revenue;
because the operations of malting and brewing are tedious, and are impossible to be
concealed; and at the same time, these commodities are not so absolutely necessary to
life, as that the raising of their price would very much affect the poorer sort. These
taxes being all mortgaged, what difficulty to find new ones! what vexation and ruin of
the poor!
Duties upon consumptions are more equal and easy than those upon possessions.
What a loss to the public, that the former are all exhausted, and that we must have
recourse to the more grievous method of levying taxes!
Were all the proprietors of land only stewards to the public, must not necessity force
them to practise all the arts of oppression used by stewards; where the absence or
negligence of the proprietor render them secure against enquiry?
It will scarcely be asserted, that no bounds ought ever to be set to national debts; and
that the public would be no weaker, were twelve or fifteen shillings in the pound,
land-tax, mortgaged, with all the present customs and excises. There is something,
therefore, in the case, beside the mere transferring of property from the one hand to
another. In 500 years, the posterity of those now in the coaches, and of those upon the
boxes,° will probably have changed places, without affecting the public by these
revolutions.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 208 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
i Suppose the public once fairly brought to that condition, to which it is hastening
with such amazing rapidity; suppose the land to be taxed eighteen or nineteen
shillings in the pound; for it can never bear the whole twenty; suppose all the excises
and customs to be screwed up to the utmost which the nation can bear, without
entirely losing its commerce and industry; and suppose that all those funds are
mortgaged to perpetuity, and that the invention and wit of all our projectors can find
no new imposition, which may serve as the foundation of a new loan; and let us
consider the necessary consequences of this situation. Though the imperfect state of
our political knowledge, and the narrow capacities of men, make it difficult to fortel
the effects which will result from any untried measure, the seeds of ruin are here
scattered with such profusion as not to escape the eye of the most careless observer.
In this unnatural state of society, the only persons, who possess any revenue beyond
the immediate effects of their industry, are the stock-holders, who draw almost all the
rent of the land and houses, besides the produce of all the customs and excises. These
are men, who have no connexions with the state, who can enjoy their revenue in any
part of the globe in which they chuse to reside, who will naturally bury themselves in
the capital or in great cities, and who will sink into the lethargy of a stupid and
pampered luxury, without spirit, ambition, or enjoyment. Adieu° to all ideas of
nobility, gentry, and family. The stocks can be transferred in an instant, and being in
such a fluctuating state, will seldom be transmitted during three generations from
father to son. Or were they to remain ever so long in one family, they convey no
hereditary authority or credit to the possessor; and by this means, the several ranks of
men, which form a kind of independent magistracy in a state, instituted by the hand of
nature, are entirely lost; and every man in authority derives his influence from the
commission alone of the sovereign. No expedient remains for preventing or
suppressing insurrections, but mercenary armies: No expedient at all remains for
resisting tyranny: Elections are swayed by bribery and corruption alone: And the
middle power between king and people being totally removed, a grievous despotism
must infallibly prevail. The landholders, despised for their poverty, and hated for their
oppressions, will be utterly unable to make any opposition to it.
Though a resolution should be formed by the legislature never to impose any tax
which hurts commerce and discourages industry, it will be impossible for men, in
subjects of such extreme delicacy, to reason so justly as never to be mistaken, or
amidst difficulties so urgent, never to be seduced from their resolution. The continual
fluctuations in commerce require continual alterations in the nature of the taxes;
which exposes the legislature every moment to the danger both of wilful and
involuntary error. And any great blow given to trade, whether by injudicious taxes or
by other accidents, throws the whole system of government into confusion.
But what expedient can the public now employ, even supposing trade to continue in
the most flourishing condition, in order to support its foreign wars and enterprizes,
and to defend its own honour and interests, or those of its allies? I do not ask how the
public is to exert such a prodigious power as it has maintained during our late wars;
where we have so much exceeded, not only our own natural strength, but even that of
the greatest empires. This extravagance is the abuse complained of, as the source of
all the dangers, to which we are at present exposed. But since we must still suppose
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 209 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
great commerce and opulence to remain, even after every fund is mortgaged; these
riches must be defended by proportional power; and whence is the public to derive the
revenue which supports it? It must plainly be from a continual taxation of the
annuitants, or, which is the same thing, from mortgaging anew, on every exigency, a
certain part of their annuities;13 and thus making them contribute to their own
defence, and to that of the nation. But the difficulties, attending this system of policy,
will easily appear, whether we suppose the king to have become absolute master, or to
be still controuled by national councils, in which the annuitants themselves must
necessarily bear the principal sway.
If the prince has become absolute, as may naturally be expected from this situation of
affairs, it is so easy for him to encrease his exactions upon the annuitants, which
amount only to the retaining money in his own hands, that this species of property
would soon lose all its credit, and the whole income of every individual in the state
must lie entirely at the mercy of the sovereign: A degree of despotism, which no
oriental monarchy has ever yet attained. If, on the contrary, the consent of the
annuitants be requisite for every taxation, they will never be persuaded to contribute
sufficiently even to the support of government; as the diminution of their revenue
must in that case be very sensible, would not be disguised under the appearance of a
branch of excise or customs, and would not be shared by any other order of the state,
who are already supposed to be taxed to the utmost. There are instances, in some
republics, of a hundredth penny, and sometimes of the fiftieth, being given to the
support of the state; but this is always an extraordinary exertion of power, and can
never become the foundation of a constant national defence. We have always found,
where a government has mortgaged all its revenues, that it necessarily sinks into a
state of languor, inactivity, and impotence.
Such are the inconveniencies, which may reasonably be foreseen, of this situation, to
which Great Britain is visibly tending. Not to mention, the numberless
inconveniencies, which cannot be foreseen, and which must result from so monstrous
a situation as that of making the public the chief or sole proprietor of land, besides
investing it with every branch of customs and excise, which the fertile imagination of
ministers and projectors° have been able to invent.
I must confess, that there is a strange supineness, from long custom, creeped into all
ranks of men, with regard to public debts, not unlike what divines so vehemently
complain of with regard to their religious doctrines. We all own, that the most
sanguine imagination cannot hope, either that this or any future ministry will be
possessed of such rigid and steady frugality, as to make a considerable progress in the
payment of our debts; or that the situation of foreign affairs will, for any long time,
allow them leisure and tranquillity for such an undertaking.jWhat then is to become of
us? Were we ever so good Christians, and ever so resigned to Providence; this,
methinks, were a curious question, even considered as a speculative one, and what it
might not be altogether impossible to form some conjectural solution of. The events
here will depend little upon the contingencies of battles, negociations, intrigues, and
factions. There seems to be a natural progress of things, which may guide our
reasoning. As it would have required but a moderate share of prudence, when we first
began this practice of mortgaging, to have foretold, from the nature of men and of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 210 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
ministers, that things would necessarily be carried to the length we see; so now, that
they have at last happily reached it, it may not be difficult to guess at the
consequences. It must, indeed, be one of these two events; either the nation must
destroy public credit, or public credit will destroy the nation. It is impossible that they
can both subsist, after the manner they have been hitherto managed, in this, as well as
in some other countries.
There was, indeed, a scheme for the payment of our debts, which was proposed by an
excellent citizen, Mr. Hutchinson,14 above thirty years ago, and which was much
approved of by some men of sense, but never was likely to take effect. He asserted,
that there was a fallacy in imagining that the public owed this debt; for that really
every individual owed a proportional share of it, and paid, in his taxes, a proportional
share of the interest, beside the expence of levying these taxes. Had we not better,
then, says he, make a distribution of the debt among ourselves, and each of us
contribute a sum suitable to his property, and by that means discharge at once all our
funds and public mortgages? He seems not to have considered, that the laborious poor
pay a considerable part of the taxes by their annual consumptions, though they could
not advance, at once, a proportional part of the sum required. Not to mention, that
property in money and stock in trade might easily be concealed or disguised; and that
visible property in lands and houses would really at last answer for the whole: An
inequality and oppression, which never would be submitted to. But though this project
is not likely to take place; it is not altogether improbable, that, when the nation
becomes heartily sick of their debts, and is cruelly oppressed by them, some daring
projector may arise with visionary schemes for their discharge. And as public credit
will begin, by that time, to be a little frail, the least touch will destroy it, as happened
in France during the regency;15 and in this manner it will die of the doctor.k
But it is more probable, that the breach of national faith will be the necessary effect of
wars, defeats, misfortunes, and public calamities, or even perhaps of victories and
conquests. I must confess, when I see princes and states fighting and quarrelling,
amidst their debts, funds, and public mortgages, it always brings to my mind a match
of cudgel-playing° fought in a China shop. How can it be expected, that sovereigns
will spare a species of property, which is pernicious to themselves and to the public,
when they have so little compassion on lives and properties, that are useful to both?
Let the time come (and surely it will come) when the new funds, created for the
exigencies of the year, are not subscribed to, and raise not the money projected.
Suppose, either that the cash of the nation is exhausted; or that our faith,° which has
hitherto been so ample, begins to fail us. Suppose, that, in this distress, the nation is
threatened with an invasion; a rebellion is suspected or broken out at home; a
squadron cannot be equipped for want of pay, victuals, or repairs; or even a foreign
subsidy cannot be advanced. What must a prince or minister do in such an
emergence? The right of self-preservation is unalienable in every individual, much
more in every community.16 And the folly of our statesmen must then be greater than
the folly of those who first contracted debt, or, what is more, than that of those who
trusted, or continue to trust this security, if these statesmen have the means of safety
in their hands, and do not employ them. The funds, created and mortgaged, will, by
that time, bring in a large yearly revenue, sufficient for the defence and security of the
nation: Money is perhaps lying in the exchequer,° ready for the discharge of the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 211 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
quarterly interest: Necessity calls, fear urges, reason exhorts, compassion alone
exclaims: The money will immediately be seized for the current service, under the
most solemn protestations, perhaps, of being immediately replaced. But no more is
requisite. The whole fabric, already tottering, falls to the ground, and buries thousands
in its ruins. And this, I think, may be called the natural death of public credit: For to
this period it tends as naturally as an animal body to its dissolution and destruction.
l So great dupes are the generality of mankind, that, notwithstanding such a violent
shock to public credit, as a voluntary bankruptcy in England would occasion, it would
not probably be long ere credit would again revive in as flourishing a condition as
before. The present king of France, during the late war,17 borrowed money at lower
interest than ever his grandfather did; and as low as the British parliament, comparing
the natural rate of interest in both kingdoms. And though men are commonly more
governed by what they have seen, than by what they foresee, with whatever certainty;
yet promises, protestations, fair appearances, with the allurements of present interest,
have such powerful influence as few are able to resist. Mankind are, in all ages,
caught by the same baits: The same tricks, played over and over again, still trepan°
them. The heights of popularity and patriotism are still the beaten road to power and
tyranny; flattery to treachery; standing armies to arbitrary government; and the glory
of God to the temporal interest of the clergy. The fear of an everlasting destruction of
credit, allowing it to be an evil, is a needless bugbear.° A prudent man, in reality,
would rather lend to the public immediately after we had taken a spunge to our debts,
than at present; as much as an opulent knave, even though one could not force him to
pay, is a preferable debtor to an honest bankrupt: For the former, in order to carry on
business, may find it his interest to discharge his debts, where they are not exorbitant:
The latter has it not in his power. The reasoning of Tacitus,18 as it is eternally true, is
very applicable to our present case. Sed vulgus ad magnitudinem beneficiorum aderat:
Stultissimus quisque pecuniis mercabatur: Apud sapientes cassa habebantur, quæ
neque dari neque accipi, salva republica, poterant. The public is a debtor, whom no
man can oblige to pay. The only check which the creditors have upon her, is the
interest of preserving credit; an interest, which may easily be overbalanced by a great
debt, and by a difficult and extraordinary emergence, even supposing that credit
irrecoverable. Not to mention, that a present necessity often forces states into
measures, which are, strictly speaking, against their interest.
These two events, supposed above, are calamitous, but not the most calamitous.
Thousands are thereby sacrificed to the safety of millions. But we are not without
danger, that the contrary event may take place, and that millions may be sacrificed for
ever to the temporary safety of thousands.19 Our popular government, perhaps, will
render it difficult or dangerous for a minister to venture on so desperate an expedient,
as that of a voluntary bankruptcy. And though the house of Lords be altogether
composed of proprietors of land, and the house of Commons chiefly; and
consequently neither of them can be supposed to have great property in the funds. Yet
the connections of the members may be so great with the proprietors, as to render
them more tenacious of public faith, than prudence, policy, or even justice, strictly
speaking, requires. And perhaps too, our foreign enemiesm may be so politic as to
discover, that our safety lies in despair, and may not, therefore, show the danger, open
and barefaced, till it be inevitable. The balance of power in Europe, our grandfathers,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 212 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
our fathers, and we, have all deemed too unequal to be preserved without our attention
and assistance. But our children, weary of the struggle, and fettered with
incumbrances, may sit down secure, and see their neighbours oppressed and
conquered; till, at last, they themselves and their creditors lie both at the mercy of the
conqueror. And this may properly enough be denominated the violent death of our
public credit.
These seem to be the events, which are not very remote, and which reason foresees as
clearly almost as she can do any thing that lies in the womb of time. And though the
ancients maintained, that in order to reach the gift of prophecy, a certain divine fury
or madness was requisite, one may safely affirm, that, in order to deliver such
prophecies as these, no more is necessary, than merely to be in one’s senses, free from
the influence of popular madness and delusion.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 213 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY X
OF SOME REMARKABLE CUSTOMS
I shall observe three remarkable customs in three celebrated governments; and shall
conclude from the whole, that all general maxims in politics ought to be established
with great caution; and that irregular and extraordinary appearances are frequently
discovered in the moral, as well as in the physical world. The former, perhaps, we can
better account for, after they happen, from springs and principles, of which every one
has, within himself, or from observation, the strongest assurance and conviction: But
it is often fully as impossible for human prudence, before-hand, to foresee and foretel
them.
I. One would think it essential to every supreme council or assembly, which debates,
that entire liberty of speech should be granted to every member, and that all motions
or reasonings should be received, which can any wise tend to illustrate the point under
deliberation. One would conclude, with still greater assurance, that, after a motion
was made, which was voted and approved by that assembly in which the legislative
power is lodged, the member who made the motion must for ever be exempted from
future trial or enquiry. But no political maxim can, at first sight, appear more
undisputable, than that he must, at least, be secured from all inferior jurisdiction; and
that nothing less than the same supreme legislative assembly, in their subsequent
meetings, could make him accountable for those motions and harangues, to which
they had before given their approbation. But these axioms, however irrefragable° they
may appear, have all failed in the Athenian government, from causes and principles
too, which appear almost inevitable.
By the γραφ? παρανόμων, or indictment of illegality, (though it has not been remarked
by antiquaries or commentators) any man was tried and punished in a common court
of judicature, for any law which had passed upon his motion, in the assembly of the
people, if that law appeared to the court unjust, or prejudicial to the public. Thus
Demosthenes, finding that ship-money was levied irregularly, and that the poor bore
the same burden as the rich in equipping the gallies, corrected this inequality by a
very useful law, which proportioned the expence to the revenue and income of each
individual. He moved for this law in the assembly: he proved its advantages;1 he
convinced the people, the only legislature in Athens; the law passed, and was carried
into execution: Yet was he tried in a criminal court for that law, upon the complaint of
the rich, who resented the alteration that he had introduced into the finances.2 He was
indeed acquitted, upon proving anew the usefulness of his law.
Ctesiphon moved in the assembly of the people, that particular honours should be
conferred on Demosthenes, as on a citizen affectionate and useful to the
commonwealth: The people, convinced of this truth, voted those honours: Yet was
Ctesiphon tried by the γραφ? παρανόμων. It was asserted, among other topics, that
Demosthenes was not a good citizen, nor affectionate to the commonwealth: And the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 214 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
orator was called upon to defend his friend, and consequently himself; which he
executed by that sublime piece of eloquence, that has ever since been the admiration
of mankind.3
After the battle of Chæronea, a law was passed upon the motion of Hyperides, giving
liberty to slaves, and inrolling them in the troops.4 On account of this law, the orator
was afterwards tried by the indictment above-mentioned, and defended himself,
among other topics, by that stroke celebrated by Plutarch and Longinus. It was not I,
said he, that moved for this law: It was the necessities of war; it was the battle
ofChæronea. The orations of Demosthenes abound with many instances of trials of
this nature, and prove clearly, that nothing was more commonly practised.
The Athenian Democracy was such a tumultuous government as we can scarcely form
a notion of in the present age of the world. The whole collective body of the people
voted in every law, without any limitation of property, without any distinction of rank,
without controul from any magistracy or senate;5 and consequently without regard to
order, justice, or prudence. The Athenians soon became sensible of the mischiefs
attending this constitution: But being averse to checking themselves by any rule or
restriction, they resolved, at least, to check their demagogues or counsellors, by the
fear of future punishment and enquiry. They accordingly instituted this remarkable
law; a law esteemed so essential to their form of government, that Æschines insists on
it as a known truth, that, were it abolished or neglected, it were impossible for the
Democracy to subsist.6
The people feared not any ill consequence to liberty from the authority of the criminal
courts; because these were nothing but very numerous juries, chosen by lot from
among the people. And they justly considered themselves as in a state of perpetual
pupillage;° where they had an authority, after they came to the use of reason, not only
to retract and controul whatever had been determined, but to punish any guardian for
measures which they had embraced by his persuasion. The same law had place in
Thebes;7 and for the same reason.
It appears to have been a usual practice in Athens, on the establishment of any law
esteemed very useful or popular, to prohibit for ever its abrogation and repeal. Thus
the demagogue, who diverted all the public revenues to the support of shows and
spectacles, made it criminal so much as to move for a repeal of this law.8 Thus
Leptines moved for a law, not only to recal all the immunities formerly granted, but to
deprive the people for the future of the power of granting any more.9 Thus all bills of
attainder10 were forbid, or laws that affected one Athenian, without extending to the
whole commonwealth. These absurd clauses, by which the legislature vainly
attempted to bind itself for ever, proceeded from an universal sense in the people of
their own levity and inconstancy.
II. A wheel within a wheel, such as we observe in the German empire, is considered
by Lord Shaftesbury11 as an absurdity in politics: But what must we say to two equal
wheels, which govern the same political machine, without any mutual check,
controul, or subordination; and yet preserve the greatest harmony and concord? To
establish two distinct legislatures, each of which possesses full and absolute authority
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 215 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
within itself, and stands in no need of the other’s assistance, in order to give validity
to its acts; this may appear, before-hand, altogether impracticable, as long as men are
actuated by the passions of ambition, emulation, and avarice, which have hitherto
been their chief governing principles. And should I assert, that the state I have in my
eye was divided into two distinct factions, each of which predominated in a distinct
legislature, and yet produced no clashing in these independent powers; the supposition
may appear incredible. And if, to augment the paradox, I should affirm, that this
disjointed, irregular government, was the most active, triumphant, and illustrious
commonwealth, that ever yet appeared; I should certainly be told, that such a political
chimera was as absurd as any vision of priests or poets. But there is no need for
searching long, in order to prove the reality of the foregoing suppositions: For this
was actually the case with the Roman republic.
The legislative power was there lodged in the comitia centuriata and comitia
tributa.12 In the former, it is well known, the people voted according to their census;
so that when the first class was unanimous, though it contained not, perhaps, the
hundredth part of the commonwealth, it determined the whole; and, with the authority
of the senate, established a law. In the latter, every vote was equal; and as the
authority of the senate was not there requisite, the lower people entirely prevailed, and
gave law to the whole state. In all party-divisions, at first between the Patricians and
Plebeians, afterwards between the nobles and the people, the interest of the
Aristocracy was predominant in the first legislature; that of the Democracy in the
second: The one could always destroy what the other had established: Nay, the one,
by a sudden and unforeseen motion, might take the start of the other, and totally
annihilate its rival, by a vote, which, from the nature of the constitution, had the full
authority of a law. But no such contest is observed in the history of Rome: No
instance of a quarrel between these two legislatures; though many between the parties
that governed in each. Whence arose this concord, which may seem so extraordinary?
The legislature established in Rome, by the authority of Servius Tullius, was the
comitia centuriata, which, after the expulsion of the kings, rendered the government,
for some time, very aristocratical. But the people, having numbers and force on their
side, and being elated with frequent conquests and victories in their foreign wars,
always prevailed when pushed to extremity, and first extorted from the senate the
magistracy of the tribunes, and next the legislative power of the comitia tributa. It
then behoved the nobles to be more careful than ever not to provoke the people. For
beside the force which the latter were always possessed of, they had now got
possession of legal authority, and could instantly break in pieces any order or
institution which directly opposed them. By intrigue, by influence, by money, by
combination, and by the respect paid to their character, the nobles might often prevail,
and direct the whole machine of government: But had they openly set their comitia
centuriata in opposition to the tributa, they had soon lost the advantage of that
institution, together with their consuls, prætors, ediles, and all the magistrates elected
by it. But the comitia tributa, not having the same reason for respecting the
centuriata, frequently repealed laws favourable to the Aristocracy: They limited the
authority of the nobles, protected the people from oppression, and controuled the
actions of the senate and magistracy. The centuriata found it convenient always to
submit; and though equal in authority, yet being inferior in power, durst never directly
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 216 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
give any shock to the other legislature, either by repealing its laws, or establishing
laws, which, it foresaw, would soon be repealed by it.
No instance is found of any opposition or struggle between these comitia; except one
slight attempt of this kind, mentioned by Appian in the third book of his civil
wars.13Mark Anthony, resolving to deprive Decimus Brutus of the government of
Cisalpine Gaul, railed in the Forum, and called one of the comitia, in order to prevent
the meeting of the other, which had been ordered by the senate. But affairs were then
fallen into such confusion, and the Roman constitution was so near its final
dissolution, that no inference can be drawn from such an expedient. This contest,
besides, was founded more on form than party. It was the senate who ordered the
comitia tributa, that they might obstruct the meeting of the centuriata, which, by the
constitution, or at least forms of the government, could alone dispose of provinces.
Cicero was recalled by the comitia centuriata, though banished by the tributa, that is,
by a plebiscitum. But his banishment, we may observe, never was considered as a
legal deed, arising from the free choice and inclination of the people. It was always
ascribed to the violence alone of Clodius, and to the disorders introduced by him into
the government.
III. The third custom, which we purpose to remark, regards England, and though it be
not so important as those which we have pointed out in Athens and Rome, is no less
singular and unexpected. It is a maxim in politics, which we readily admit as
undisputed and universal, that a power, however great, when granted by law to an
eminent magistrate, is not so dangerous to liberty, as an authority, however
inconsiderable, which he acquires from violence and usurpation. For, besides that the
law always limits every power which it bestows, the very receiving it as a concession
establishes the authority whence it is derived, and preserves the harmony of the
constitution. By the same right that one prerogative is assumed without law, another
may also be claimed, and another, with still greater facility; while the first usurpations
both serve as precedents to the following, and give force to maintain them. Hence the
heroism of Hampden’s conduct,14 who sustained the whole violence of royal
prosecution, rather than pay a tax of twenty shillings, not imposed by parliament;
hence the care of all English patriots to guard against the first encroachments of the
crown; and hence alone the existence, at this day, of English liberty.
There is, however, one occasion, where the parliament has departed from this maxim;
and that is, in the pressing of seamen.15 The exercise of an irregular power is here
tacitly permitted in the crown; and though it has frequently been under deliberation,
how that power might be rendered legal, and granted, under proper restrictions, to the
sovereign, no safe expedient could ever be proposed for that purpose; and the danger
to liberty always appeared greater from law than from usurpation. While this power is
exercised to no other end than to man the navy, men willingly submit to it, from a
sense of its use and necessity; and the sailors, who are alone affected by it, find no
body to support them, in claiming the rights and privileges, which the law grants,
without distinction, to all English subjects. But were this power, on any occasion,
made an instrument of faction or ministerial tyranny, the opposite faction, and indeed
all lovers of their country, would immediately take the alarm, and support the injured
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 217 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
party; the liberty of Englishmen would be asserted; juries would be implacable; and
the tools of tyranny, acting both against law and equity, would meet with the severest
vengeance. On the other hand, were the parliament to grant such an authority, they
would probably fall into one of these two inconveniencies: They would either bestow
it under so many restrictions as would make it lose its effect, by cramping the
authority of the crown; or they would render it so large and comprehensive, as might
give occasion to great abuses, for which we could, in that case, have no remedy. The
very irregularity of the practice, at present, prevents its abuses, by affording so easy a
remedy against them.
I pretend not, by this reasoning, to exclude all possibility of contriving a register for
seamen, which might man the navy, without being dangerous to liberty. I only
observe, that no satisfactory scheme of that nature has yet been proposed. Rather than
adopt any project hitherto invented, we continue a practice seemingly the most absurd
and unaccountable. Authority, in times of full internal peace and concord, is armed
against law. A continued violence is permitted in the crown, amidst the greatest
jealousy and watchfulness in the people; nay proceeding from those very principles:
Liberty, in a country of the highest liberty, is left entirely to its own defence, without
any countenance or protection: The wild state of nature is renewed, in one of the most
civilized societies of mankind:16 And great violence and disordera are committed
with impunity; while the one party pleads obedience to the supreme magistrate, the
other the sanction of fundamental laws.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 218 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XI
OF THE POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONSA
There is very little ground, either from reason or observation, to conclude the world
eternal or incorruptible. The continual and rapid motion of matter, the violent
revolutions with which every part is agitated, the changes remarked in the heavens,
the plain traces as well as tradition of an universal deluge, or general convulsion of
the elements; all these prove strongly the mortality of this fabric of the world, and its
passage, by corruption or dissolution, from one state or order to another. It must
therefore, as well as each individual form which it contains, have its infancy, youth,
manhood, and old age; and it is probable, that, in all these variations, man, equally
with every animal and vegetable, will partake. In the flourishing age of the world, it
may be expected, that the human species should possess greater vigour both of mind
and body, more prosperous health, higher spirits, longer life, and a stronger
inclination and power of generation. But if the general system of things, and human
society of course, have any such gradual revolutions, they are too slow to be
discernible in that short period which is comprehended by history and tradition.
Stature and force of body, length of life, even courage and extent of genius, seem
hitherto to have been naturally, in all ages, pretty much the same. The arts and
sciences, indeed, have flourished in one period, and have decayed in another: But we
may observe, that, at the time when they rose to greatest perfection among one
people, they were perhaps totally unknown to all the neighbouring nations; and
though they universally decayed in one age, yet in a succeeding generation they again
revived, and diffused themselves over the world. As far, therefore, as observation
reaches, there is no universal difference discernible in the human species; and though
it were allowed, that the universe, like an animal body, had a natural progress from
infancy to old age; yet as it must still be uncertain, whether, at present, it be
advancing to its point of perfection, or declining from it, we cannot thence presuppose
any decay in human nature.1 To prove, therefore, or account for that superior
populousness of antiquity, which is commonly supposed, by the imaginary youth or
vigour of the world, will scarcely be admitted by any just reasoner. These general
physical causes ought entirely to be excluded from this question.2
There are indeed some more particular physical causes of importance. Diseases are
mentioned in antiquity, which are almost unknown to modern medicine; and new
diseases have arisen and propagated themselves, of which there are no traces in
ancient history. In this particular we may observe, upon comparison, that the
disadvantage is much on the side of the moderns. Not to mention some others of less
moment; the small-pox commits such ravages, as would almost alone account for the
great superiority ascribed to ancient times. The tenth or the twelfth part of mankind,
destroyed every generation, should make a vast difference, it may be thought, in the
numbers of the people; and when joined to venereal distempers, a new plague diffused
every where, this disease is perhaps equivalent, by its constant operation, to the three
great scourges of mankind, war, pestilence, and famine. Were it certain, therefore, that
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 219 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
ancient times were more populous than the present, and could no moral causes be
assigned for so great a change; these physical causes alone, in the opinion of many,
would be sufficient to give us satisfaction on that head.
But is it certain, that antiquity was so much more populous, as is pretended? The
extravagancies of Vossius, with regard to this subject, are well known.3 But an author
of much greater genius and discernment has ventured to affirm, that, according to the
best computations which these subjects will admit of, there are not now, on the face of
the earth, the fiftieth part of mankind, which existed in the time of Julius Cæsar.4 It
may easily be observed, that the comparison, in this case, must be imperfect, even
though we confine ourselves to the scene of ancient history; Europe, and the nations
round the Mediterranean. We know not exactly the numbers of any European
kingdom, or even city, at present: How can we pretend to calculate those of ancient
cities and states, where historians have left us such imperfect traces? For my part, the
matter appears to me so uncertain, that, as I intend to throw together some reflections
on that head, I shall intermingle the enquiry concerning causes with that concerning
facts; which ought never to be admitted, where the facts can be ascertained with any
tolerable assurance. We shall, first, consider whether it be probable, from what we
know of the situation of society in both periods, that antiquity must have been more
populous; secondly, whether in reality it was so. If I can make it appear, that the
conclusion is not so certain as is pretended, in favour of antiquity, it is all I aspire to.
In general, we may observe, that the question, with regard to the comparative
populousness of ages or kingdoms, implies important consequences, and commonly
determines concerning the preference of their whole police, their manners, and the
constitution of their government. For as there is in all men, both male and female, a
desire and power of generation, more active than is ever universally exerted, the
restraints, which they lie under, must proceed from some difficulties in their situation,
which it belongs to a wise legislature carefully to observe and remove. Almost every
man who thinks he can maintain a family will have one; and the human species, at
this rate of propagation, would more than double every generation.b How fast do
mankind multiply in every colony or new settlement; where it is an easy matter to
provide for a family; and where men are nowise straitened° or confined, as in long
established governments? History tells us frequently of plagues, which have swept
away the third or fourth part of a people: Yet in a generation or two, the destruction
was not perceived; and the society had again acquired their former number. The lands
which were cultivated, the houses built, the commodities raised, the riches acquired,
enabled the people, who escaped, immediately to marry, and to rear families, which
supplied the place of those who had perished.5 And for a like reason, every wise, just,
and mild government, by rendering the condition of its subjects easy and secure, will
always abound most in people, as well as in commodities and riches.c A country,
indeed, whose climate and soil are fitted for vines, will naturally be more populous
than one which produces corn only, and that more populous than one which is only
fitted for pasturage. In general, warm climates, as the necessities of the inhabitants are
there fewer, and vegetation more powerful, are likely to be most populous: But if
every thing else be equal, it seems natural to expect, that, wherever there are most
happiness and virtue, and the wisest institutions, there will also be most people.6
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 220 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The question, therefore, concerning the populousness of ancient and modern times,
being allowed of great importance, it will be requisite, if we would bring it to some
determination, to compare both the domestic and political situation of these two
periods, in order to judge of the facts by their moral causes; which is the first view in
which we proposed to consider them.
The chief difference between the domestic œconomy of the ancients and that of the
moderns consists in the practice of slavery, which prevailed among the former, and
which has been abolished for some centuries throughout the greater part of Europe.
Some passionate admirers of the ancients, and zealous partizans of civil liberty, (for
these sentiments, as they are, both of them, in the main, extremely just, are found to
be almost inseparable) cannot forbear regretting the loss of this institution; and whilst
they brand all submission to the government of a single person with the harsh
denomination of slavery, they would gladly reduce the greater part of mankind to real
slavery and subjection. But to one who considers coolly on the subject it will appear,
that human nature, in general, really enjoys more liberty at present, in the most
arbitrary government of Europe, than it ever did during the most flourishing period of
ancient times. As much as submission to a petty prince, whose dominions extend not
beyond a single city, is more grievous than obedience to a great monarch; so much is
domestic slavery more cruel and oppressive than any civil subjection whatsoever. The
more the master is removed from us in place and rank, the greater liberty we enjoy;
the less are our actions inspected and controled; and the fainter that cruel comparison
becomes between our own subjection, and the freedom, and even dominion of
another. The remains which are found of domestic slavery, in the American colonies,
and among some European nations, would never surely create a desire of rendering it
more universal. The little humanity, commonly observed in persons, accustomed,
from their infancy, to exercise so great authority over their fellow-creatures, and to
trample upon human nature, were sufficient alone to disgust us with that unbounded
dominion. Nor can a more probable reason be assigned for the severe, I might say,
barbarous manners of ancient times, than the practice of domestic slavery; by which
every man of rank was rendered a petty tyrant, and educated amidst the flattery,
submission, and low debasement of his slaves.7
According to ancient practice, all checks were on the inferior, to restrain him to the
duty of submission; none on the superior, to engage him to the reciprocal duties of
gentleness and humanity. In modern times, a bad servant finds not easily a good
master, nor a bad master a good servant; and the checks are mutual, suitably to the
inviolable and eternal laws of reason and equity.
The custom of exposing old, useless, or sick slaves in an island of the Tyber, there to
starve, seems to have been pretty common in Rome; and whoever recovered, after
having been so exposed, had his liberty given him, by an edict of the emperor
Claudius; in which it was likewise forbidden to kill any slave merely for old age or
sickness.8 But supposing that this edict was strictly obeyed, would it better the
domestic treatment of slaves, or render their lives much more comfortable? We may
imagine what others would practise, when it was the professed maxim of the elder
Cato, to sell his superannuated slaves for any price, rather than maintain what he
esteemed a useless burden.9
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 221 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The ergastula, or dungeons, where slaves in chains were forced to work, were very
common all over Italy. Columella10 advises, that they be always built under ground;
and recommends11 it as the duty of a careful overseer, to call over every day the
names of these slaves, like the mustering of a regiment or ship’s company, in order to
know presently when any of them had deserted. A proof of the frequency of these
ergastula, and of the great number of slaves usually confined in them.d
A chained slave for a porter, was usual in Rome, as appears from Ovid,12 and other
authors.13 Had not these people shaken off all sense of compassion towards that
unhappy part of their species, would they have presented their friends, at the first
entrance, with such an image of the severity of the master, and misery of the slave?
Nothing so common in all trials, even of civil causes, as to call for the evidence of
slaves; which was always extorted by the most exquisite torments. Demosthenes
says,14 that, where it was possible to produce, for the same fact, either freemen or
slaves, as witnesses, the judges always preferred the torturing of slaves, as a more
certain evidence.15
Seneca draws a picture of that disorderly luxury, which changes day into night, and
night into day, and inverts every stated hour of every office in life. Among other
circumstances, such as displacing the meals and times of bathing, he mentions, that,
regularly about the third hour of the night, the neighbours of one, who indulges this
false refinement, hear the noise of whips and lashes; and, upon enquiry, find that he is
then taking an account of the conduct of his servants, and giving them due correction
and discipline. This is not remarked as an instance of cruelty, but only of disorder,
which, even in actions the most usual and methodical, changes the fixed hours that an
established custom had assigned for them.16
But our present business is only to consider the influence of slavery on the
populousness of a state. It is pretended, that, in this particular, the ancient practice had
infinitely the advantage, and was the chief cause of that extreme populousness, which
is supposed in those times. At present, all masters discourage the marrying of their
male servants, and admit not by any means the marriage of the female, who are then
supposed altogether incapacitated for their service. But where the property of the
servants is lodged in the master, their marriage forms his riches, and brings him a
succession of slaves that supply the place of those whom age and infirmity have
disabled. He encourages, therefore, their propagation as much as that of his cattle;
rears the young with the same care; and educates them to some art or calling, which
may render them more useful or valuable to him. The opulent are, by this policy,
interested in the being at least, though not in the well-being of the poor; and enrich
themselves, by encreasing the number and industry of those who are subjected to
them. Each man, being a sovereign in his own family, has the same interest with
regard to it, as the prince with regard to the state; and has not, like the prince, any
opposite motives of ambition or vain-glory, which may lead him to depopulate his
little sovereignty. All of it is, at all times, under his eye; and he has leisure to inspect
the most minute detail of the marriage and education of his subjects.17
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 222 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Such are the consequences of domestic slavery, according to the first aspect and
appearance of things: But if we enter more deeply into the subject, we shall perhaps
find reason to retract our hasty determinations. The comparison is shocking between
the management of human creatures and that of cattle; but being extremely just, when
applied to the present subject, it may be proper to trace the consequences of it. At the
capital, near all great cities, in all populous, rich, industrious provinces, few cattle are
bred. Provisions, lodging, attendance, labour are there dear; and men find their
account better in buying the cattle, after they come to a certain age, from the remoter
and cheaper countries. These are consequently the only breeding countries for cattle;
and by a parity of reason, for men too, when the latter are put on the same footing
with the former. To rear a child in London, till he could be serviceable, would cost
much dearer, than to buy one of the same age from Scotland or Ireland; where he had
been bred in a cottage, covered with rags, and fed on oatmeal or potatoes. Those who
had slaves, therefore, in all the richer and more populous countries, would discourage
the pregnancy of the females, and either prevent or destroy the birth. The human
species would perish in those places where it ought to encrease the fastest; and a
perpetual recruit be wanted from the poorer and more desert provinces. Such a
continued drain would tend mightily to depopulate the state, and render great cities
ten times more destructive than with us; where every man is master of himself, and
provides for his children from the powerful instinct of nature, not the calculations of
sordid interest. If London, at present, without much encreasing, needs a yearly recruit
from the country, of 5000 people, as is usually computed, what must it require, if the
greater part of the tradesmen and common people were slaves, and were hindered
from breeding by their avaricious masters?
All ancient authors tell us, that there was a perpetual flux of slaves to Italy from the
remoter provinces, particularly Syria, Cilicia,18Cappadocia, and the Lesser Asia,
Thrace, and Ægypt: Yet the number of people did not encrease in Italy; and writers
complain of the continual decay of industry and agriculture.19 Where then is that
extreme fertility of the Roman slaves, which is commonly supposed? So far from
multiplying, they could not, it seems, so much as keep up the stock, without immense
recruits. And though great numbers were continually manumitted and converted into
Roman citizens, the numbers even of these did not encrease,20 till the freedom of the
city was communicated to foreign provinces.
The term for a slave, born and bred in the family, was verna;21 and these slaves seem
to have been entitled by custom to privileges and indulgences beyond others; a
sufficient reason why the masters would not be fond of rearing many of that kind.22
Whoever is acquainted with the maxims of our planters, will acknowledge the
justness of this observation.23
Atticus is much praised by his historian for the care, which he took in recruiting his
family from the slaves born in it:24 May we not thence infer, that this practice was
not then very common?
The names of slaves in the Greek comedies, Syrus, Mysus, Geta, Thrax, Davus,
Lydus, Phryx, &c. afford a presumption, that, at Athens at least, most of the slaves
were imported from foreign countries. The Athenians, says Strabo,25 gave to their
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 223 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
slaves, either the names of the nations whence they were bought, as Lydus, Syrus; or
the names that were most common among those nations, as Manes or Midas to a
Phrygian, Tibias to a Paphlagonian.
Demosthenes, having mentioned a law which forbad any man to strike the slave of
another, praises the humanity of this law; and adds, that, if the barbarians from whom
the slaves were bought, had information, that their countrymen met with such gentle
treatment, they would entertain a great esteem for the Athenians.26Isocrates27 too
insinuates, that the slaves of the Greeks were generally or very commonly
barbarians.fAristotle in his Politics28 plainly supposes, that a slave is always a
foreigner. The ancient comic writers represented the slaves as speaking a barbarous
language.29 This was an imitation of nature.
It is well known that Demosthenes, in his nonage, had been defrauded of a large
fortune by his tutors, and that afterwards he recovered, by a prosecution at law, the
value of his patrimony. His orations, on that occasion, still remain, and contain an
exact detail of the whole substance left by his father,30 in money, merchandise,
houses, and slaves, together with the value of each particular. Among the rest were 52
slaves, handicraftsmen, namely, 32 sword-cutlers, and 20 cabinet-makers;31 all
males; not a word of any wives, children or family, which they certainly would have
had, had it been a common practice at Athens to breed from the slaves: And the value
of the whole must have much depended on that circumstance. No female slaves are
even so much as mentioned, except some house-maids, who belonged to his mother.
This argument has great force, if it be not altogether conclusive.
Consider this passage of Plutarch,32 speaking of the Elder Cato. “He had a great
number of slaves, whom he took care to buy at the sales of prisoners of war; and he
chose them young, that they might easily be accustomed to any diet or manner of life,
and be instructed in any business or labour, as men teach any thing to young dogs or
horses.—And esteeming love the chief source of all disorders, he allowed the male
slaves to have a commerce with the female in his family, upon paying a certain sum
for this privilege: But he strictly prohibited all intrigues out of his family.” Are there
any symptoms in this narration of that care which is supposed in the ancients, of the
marriage and propagation of their slaves? If that was a common practice, founded on
general interest, it would surely have been embraced by Cato, who was a great
œconomist, and lived in times when the ancient frugality and simplicity of manners
were still in credit and reputation.
It is expressly remarked by the writers of the Roman law, that scarcely any ever
purchase slaves with a view of breeding from them.33
Our lackeys and house-maids, I own, do not serve much to multiply their species: But
the ancients, besides those who attended on their person, had almost all their labour
performed, g and even manufactures executed, by slaves, who lived, many of them, in
their family; and some great men possessed to the number of 10,000. If there be any
suspicion, therefore, that this institution was unfavourable to propagation, (and the
same reason, at least in part, holds with regard to ancient slaves as modern servants)
how destructive must slavery have proved?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 224 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
History mentions a Roman nobleman, who had 400 slaves under the same roof with
him: And having been assassinated at home by the furious revenge of one of them, the
law was executed with rigour, and all without exception were put to death.34 Many
other Roman noblemen had families equally, or more numerous; and I believe every
one will allow, that this would scarcely be practicable, were we to suppose all the
slaves married, and the females to be breeders.35
So early as the poet Hesiod,36 married slaves, whether male or female, were esteemed
inconvenient. How much more, where families had encreased to such an enormous
size as in Rome, and where the ancient simplicity of manners was banished from all
ranks of people?
Xenophon in his Oeconomics, where he gives directions for the management of a
farm, recommends a strict care and attention of laying the male and the female slaves
at a distance from each other. He seems not to suppose that they are ever married.37
The only slaves among the Greeks that appear to have continued their own race, were
the Helotes, who had houses apart, and were more the slaves of the public than of
individuals.38
h The same author39 tells us, that Nicias’s overseer, by agreement with his master,
was obliged to pay him an obolus a day for each slave; besides maintaining them, and
keeping up the number. Had the ancient slaves been all breeders, this last
circumstance of the contract had been superfluous.
The ancients talk so frequently of a fixed, stated portion of provisions assigned to
each slave,40 that we are naturally led to conclude, that slaves lived almost all single,
and received that portion as a kind of board-wages.
The practice, indeed, of marrying slaves seems not to have been very common, even
among the country-labourers, where it is more naturally to be expected. Cato,41
enumerating the slaves requisite to labour a vineyard of a hundred acres, makes them
amount to 15; the overseer and his wife, villicus and villica, and 13 male slaves; for an
olive plantation of 240 acres, the overseer and his wife, and 11 male slaves; and so in
proportion to a greater or less plantation or vineyard.
Varro,42 quoting this passage of Cato, allows his computation to be just in every
respect, except the last. For as it is requisite, says he, to have an overseer and his wife,
whether the vineyard or plantation be great or small, this must alter the exactness of
the proportion. Had Cato’s computation been erroneous in any other respect, it had
certainly been corrected by Varro, who seems fond of discovering so trivial an error.
The same author,43 as well as Columella,44 recommends it as requisite to give a wife
to the overseer, in order to attach him the more strongly to his master’s service. This
was therefore a peculiar indulgence granted to a slave, in whom so great confidence
was reposed.
In the same place, Varro mentions it as an useful precaution, not to buy too many
slaves from the same nation, lest they beget factions and seditions in the family:45 A
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 225 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
presumption, that in Italy, the greater part, even of the country labouring slaves, (for
he speaks of no other) were bought from the remoter provinces. All the world knows,
that the family slaves in Rome, who were instruments of show and luxury, were
commonly imported from the east. Hoc profecere, says Pliny, speaking of the jealous
care of masters, mancipiorum legiones, et in domo turba externa, ac servorum quoque
causa nomenclator adhibendus.46
It is indeed recommended by Varro,47 to propagate young shepherds in the family
from the old ones. For as grasing farms were commonly in remote and cheap places,
and each shepherd lived in a cottage apart, his marriage and encrease were not liable
to the same inconveniencies as in dearer places, and where many servants lived in the
family; which was universally the case in such of the Roman farms as produced wine
or corn. If we consider this exception with regard to shepherds, and weigh the reasons
of it, it will serve for a strong confirmation of all our foregoing suspicions.48
Columella,49 I own, advises the master to give a reward, and even liberty to a female
slave, that had reared him above three children: A proof, that sometimes the ancients
propagated from their slaves; which, indeed, cannot be denied. Were it otherwise, the
practice of slavery, being so common in antiquity, must have been destructive to a
degree which no expedient could repair. All I pretend to infer from these reasonings
is, that slavery is in general disadvantageous both to the happiness and populousness
of mankind, and that its place is much better supplied by the practice of hired
servants.
The laws, or, as some writers call them, the seditions of the Gracchi, were occasioned
by their observing the encrease of slaves all over Italy, and the diminution of free
citizens. Appian50 ascribes this encrease to the propagation of the slaves: Plutarch51
to the purchasing of barbarians, who were chained and imprisoned, βαρβαρικα
δεσμωτηρια.52 It is to be presumed that both causes concurred.
Sicily, says Florus,53 was full of ergastula, and was cultivated by labourers in chains.
Eunus and Athenio excited the servile war, by breaking up these monstrous prisons,
and giving liberty to 60,000 slaves. The younger Pompey augmented his army in
Spain by the same expedient.54 If the country labourers, throughout the Roman
empire, were so generally in this situation, and if it was difficult or impossible to find
separate lodgings for the families of the city servants, how unfavourable to
propagation, as well as to humanity, must the institution of domestic slavery be
esteemed?
Constantinople, at present, requires the same recruits of slaves from all the provinces,
that Rome did of old; and these provinces are of consequence far from being
populous.
Egypt, according to Mons. Maillet,55 sends continual colonies of black slaves to the
other parts of the Turkish empire; and receives annually an equal return of white: The
one brought from the inland parts of Africa; the other from Mingrelia, Circassia, and
Tartary.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 226 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Our modern convents are, no doubt, bad institutions: But there is reason to suspect,
that anciently every great family in Italy, and probably in other parts of the world, was
a species of convent. And though we have reason to condemn all those popish
institutions, as nurseriesj of superstition, burthensome to the public, and oppressive to
the poor prisoners, male as well as female; yet may it be questioned whether they be
so destructive to the populousness of a state, as is commonly imagined. Were the
land, which belongs to a convent, bestowed on a nobleman, he would spend its
revenue on dogs, horses, grooms, footmen, cooks, and house-maids; and his family
would not furnish many more citizens than the convent.
The common reason, why any parent thrusts his daughters into nunneries, is, that he
may not be overburthened with too numerous a family; but the ancients had a method
almost as innocent, and more effectual to that purpose, to wit, exposing their children
in early infancy. This practice was very common; and is not spoken of by any author
of those times with the horror it deserves, or scarcely56 even with disapprobation.
Plutarch, the humane, good-natured Plutarch,57 mentions it as a merit in Attalus, king
of Pergamus, that he murdered, or, if you will, exposed all his own children, in order
to leave his crown to the son of his brother, Eumenes; signalizing in this manner his
gratitude and affection to Eumenes, who had left him his heir preferably to that son. It
was Solon, the most celebrated of the sages of Greece, that gave parents permission
by law to kill their children.58
Shall we then allow these two circumstances to compensate each other, to wit,
monastic vows and the exposing of children, and to be unfavourable, in equal degrees,
to the propagation of mankind? I doubt the advantage is here on the side of antiquity.
Perhaps, by an odd connexion of causes, the barbarous practice of the ancients might
rather render those times more populous. By removing the terrors of too numerous a
family it would engage many people in marriage; and such is the force of natural
affection, that very few, in comparison, would have resolution enough, when it came
to the push, to carry into execution their former intentions.
China, the only country where this practice of exposing children prevails at present, is
the most populous country we know of; and every man is married before he is twenty.
Such early marriages could scarcely be general, had not men the prospect of so easy a
method of getting rid of their children. I own, that Plutarch59 speaks of it as a very
general maxim of the poor to expose their children; and as the rich were then averse to
marriage, on account of the courtship they met with from those who expected legacies
from them, the public must have been in a bad situation between them.60
Of all sciences there is none, where first appearances are more deceitful than in
politics. Hospitals for foundlings seem favourable to the encrease of numbers; and
perhaps, may be so, when kept under proper restrictions. But when they open the door
to every one, without distinction, they have probably a contrary effect, and are
pernicious to the state. It is computed, that every ninth child born at Paris, is sent to
the hospital; though it seems certain, according to the common course of human
affairs, that it is not a hundredth child whose parents are altogether incapacitated to
rear and educate him. The k great difference, for health, industry, and morals, between
an education in an hospital and that in a private family, should induce us not to make
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 227 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the entrance into the former too easy and engaging. To kill one’s own child is
shocking to nature, and must therefore be somewhat unusual; but to turn over the care
of him upon others, is very tempting to the natural indolence of mankind.
Having considered the domestic life and manners of the ancients, compared to those
of the moderns; where, in the main, we seem rather superior, so far as the present
question is concerned; we shall now examine the political customs and institutions of
both ages, and weigh their influence in retarding or forwarding the propagation of
mankind.
Before the encrease of the Roman power, or rather till its full establishment, almost all
the nations, which are the scene of ancient history, were divided into small territories
or petty commonwealths, where of course a great equality of fortune prevailed, and
the center of the government was always very near its frontiers.
This was the situation of affairs not only in Greece and Italy, but also in Spain, Gaul,
Germany, Afric, and a great part of the Lesser Asia: And it must be owned, that no
institution could be more favourable to the propagation of mankind. For, though a
man of an overgrown fortune, not being able to consume more than another, must
share it with those who serve and attend him; yet their possession being precarious,
they have not the same encouragement to marry, as if each had a small fortune, secure
and independent. Enormous cities are, besides, destructive to society, beget vice and
disorder of all kinds, starve the remoter provinces, and even starve themselves, by the
prices to which they raise all provisions. Where each man had his little house and
field to himself, and each county had its capital, free and independent; what a happy
situation of mankind! How favourable to industry and agriculture; to marriage and
propagation! The prolific virtue of men, were it to act in its full extent, without that
restraint which poverty and necessity imposes on it, would double the number every
generation: And nothing surely can give it more liberty, than such small
commonwealths, and such an equality of fortune among the citizens. All small states
naturally produce equality of fortune, because they afford no opportunities of great
encrease; but small commonwealths much more, by that division of power and
authority which is essential to them.
When Xenophon61 returned after the famous expedition with Cyrus, he hired himself
and 6000 of the Greeks into the service of Seuthes, a prince of Thrace; and the articles
of his agreement were, that each soldier should receive a daric a month, each captain
two darics, and he himself, as general, four: A regulation of pay which would not a
little surprise our modern officers.
Demosthenes and Æschines, with eight more, were sent ambassadors to Philip of
Macedon, and their appointments for above four months were a thousand drachmas,
which is less than a drachma a day for each ambassador.62 But a drachma a day, nay
sometimes two,63 was the pay of a common foot-soldier.
A centurion among the Romans had only double pay to a private man, in Polybius’s
time,64 and we accordingly find the gratuities after a triumph regulated by that
proportion.65 But Mark Anthony and the triumvirate gave the centurions five times
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 228 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the reward of the other.66 So much had the encrease of the commonwealth encreased
the inequality among the citizens.67
It must be owned, that the situation of affairs in modern times, with regard to civil
liberty, as well as equality of fortune, is not near so favourable, either to the
propagation or happiness of mankind. Europe is shared out mostly into great
monarchies; and such parts of it as are divided into small territories, are commonly
governed by absolute princes, who ruin their people by a mimicry of the greater
monarchs, in the splendor of their court and number of their forces. Swisserland alone
and Holland resemble the ancient republics; and though the former is far from
possessing any advantage either of soil, climate, or commerce, yet the numbers of
people, with which it abounds, notwithstanding their enlisting themselves into every
service in Europe, prove sufficiently the advantages of their political institutions.
The ancient republics derived their chief or only security from the numbers of their
citizens. The Trachinians having lost great numbers of their people, the remainder,
instead of enriching themselves by the inheritance of their fellow-citizens, applied to
Sparta, their metropolis, for a new stock of inhabitants. The Spartans immediately
collected ten thousand men; among whom the old citizens divided the lands of which
the former proprietors had perished.68
After Timoleon had banished Dionysius from Syracuse, and had settled the affairs of
Sicily, finding the cities of Syracuse and Sellinuntium extremely depopulated by
tyranny, war, and faction, he invited over from Greece some new inhabitants to
repeople them.69 Immediately forty thousand men (Plutarch70 says sixty thousand)
offered themselves; and he distributed so many lots of land among them, to the great
satisfaction of the ancient inhabitants: A proof at once of the maxims of ancient
policy, which affected populousness more than riches; and of the good effects of these
maxims, in the extreme populousness of that small country, Greece, which could at
once supply so great a colony. The case was not much different with the Romans in
early times. He is a pernicious citizen, said M. Curius, who cannot be content with
seven acres.71 Such ideas of equality could not fail of producing great numbers of
people.
We must now consider what disadvantages the ancients lay under with regard to
populousness, and what checks they received from their political maxims and
institutions. There are commonly compensations in every human condition: and
though these compensations be not always perfectly equal, yet they serve, at least, to
restrain the prevailing principle. To compare them and estimate their influence, is
indeed difficult, even where they take place in the same age, and in neighbouring
countries: But where several ages have intervened, and only scattered lights are
afforded us by ancient authors; what can we do but amuse ourselves by talking pro
and con, on an interesting subject, and thereby correcting all hasty and violent
determinations?
First, We may observe, that the ancient republics were almost in perpetual war, a
natural effect of their martial spirit, their love of liberty, their mutual emulation, and
that hatred which generally prevails among nations that live in close neighbourhood.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 229 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Now, war in a small state is much more destructive than in a great one; both because
all the inhabitants, in the former case, must serve in the armies; and because the whole
state is frontier, and is all exposed to the inroads of the enemy.
The maxims of ancient war were much more destructive than those of modern; chiefly
by that distribution of plunder, in which the soldiers were indulged. The private men
in our armies are such a low set of people, that we find any abundance, beyond their
simple pay, breeds confusion and disorder among them, and a total dissolution of
discipline. The very wretchedness and meanness of those, who fill the modern armies,
render them less destructive to the countries which they invade: One instance, among
many of the deceitfulness of first appearances in all political reasonings.72
Ancient battles were much more bloody, by the very nature of the weapons employed
in them. The ancients drew up their men 16 or 20, sometimes 50 men deep, which
made a narrow front; and it was not difficult to find a field, in which both armies
might be marshalled, and might engage with each other. Even where any body of the
troops was kept off by hedges, hillocks, woods, or hollow ways, the battle was not so
soon decided between the contending parties, but that the others had time to overcome
the difficulties which opposed them, and take part in the engagement. And as the
whole army was thus engaged, and each man closely buckled to his antagonist, the
battles were commonly very bloody, and great slaughter was made on both sides,
especially on the vanquished. The long thin lines, required by fire-arms, and the quick
decision of the fray, render our modern engagements but partial rencounters, and
enable the general, who is foiled in the beginning of the day, to draw off the greater
part of his army, sound and entire.l
The battles of antiquity, both by their duration, and their resemblance to single
combats, were wrought up to a degree of fury quite unknown to later ages. Nothing
could then engage the combatants to give quarter, but the hopes of profit, by making
slaves of their prisoners. In civil wars, as we learn from Tacitus,73 the battles were
the most bloody, because the prisoners were not slaves.
What a stout resistance must be made, where the vanquished expected so hard a fate!
How inveterate the rage, where the maxims of war were, in every respect, so bloody
and severe!
Instances are frequent, in ancient history, of cities besieged, whose inhabitants, rather
than open their gates, murdered their wives and children, and rushed themselves on a
voluntary death, sweetened perhaps by a little prospect of revenge upon the enemy.
Greeks,74 as well as Barbarians, have often been wrought up to this degree of fury.
And the same determined spirit and cruelty must, in other instances less remarkable,
have been destructive to human society, in those petty commonwealths, which lived
in close neighbourhood, and were engaged in perpetual wars and contentions.
Sometimes the wars in Greece, says Plutarch,75 were carried on entirely by inroads,
and robberies, and piracies. Such a method of war must be more destructive in small
states, than the bloodiest battles and sieges.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 230 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
By the laws of the twelve tables, possession during two years formed a prescription
for land; one year for moveables:76 An indication, that there was not in Italy, at that
time, much more order, tranquillity, and settled police, than there is at present among
the Tartars.
The only cartel I remember in ancient history, is that between Demetrius Poliorcetes
and the Rhodians; when it was agreed, that a free citizen should be restored for 1000
drachmas, a slave bearing arms for 500.77
But, secondly, it appears that ancient manners were more unfavourable than the
modern, not only in times of war, but also in those of peace; and that too in every
respect, except the love of civil liberty and of equality, which is, I own, of
considerable importance. To exclude faction from a free government, is very difficult,
if not altogether impracticable; but such inveterate rage between the factions, and
such bloody maxims, are found, in modern times amongst religious parties alone.n In
ancient history, we may always observe, where one party prevailed, whether the
nobles or people (for I can observe no difference in this respect78 ) that they
immediately butchered all of the opposite party who fell into their hands, and
banished such as had been so fortunate as to escape their fury. No form of process, no
law, no trial, no pardon. A fourth, a third, perhaps near half of the city was
slaughtered, or expelled, every revolution; and the exiles always joined foreign
enemies, and did all the mischief possible to their fellow-citizens; till fortune put it in
their power to take full revenge by a new revolution. And as these were frequent in
such violent governments, the disorder, diffidence, jealousy, enmity, which must
prevail, are not easy for us to imagine in this age of the world.
There are only two revolutions I can recollect in ancient history, which passed without
great severity, and great effusion of blood in massacres and assassinations, namely,
the restoration of the Athenian Democracy by Thrasybulus, and the subduing of the
Roman republic by Cæsar. We learn from ancient history, that Thrasybulus passed a
general amnesty for all past offences; and first introduced that word, as well as
practice, into Greece.79 It appears, however, from many orations of Lysias,80 that the
chief, and even some of the subaltern offenders, in the preceding tyranny, were tried,
and capitally punished.o And as to Cæsar’s clemency, though much celebrated, it
would not gain great applause in the present age. He butchered, for instance, all
Cato’s senate, when he became master of Utica;81 and these, we may readily believe,
were not the most worthless of the party. All those who had borne arms against that
usurper, were attainted; and, by Hirtius’s law, declared incapable of all public offices.
These people were extremely fond of liberty; but seem not to have understood it very
well. When the thirty tyrants first established their dominion at Athens, they began
with seizing all the sycophants and informers, who had been so troublesome during
the Democracy, and putting them to death by an arbitrary sentence and execution.
Every man, says Sallust82 and Lysias,83was rejoiced at these punishments; not
considering, that liberty was from that moment annihilated.
The utmost energy of the nervous style of Thucydides, and the copiousness and
expression of the Greek language, seem to sink under that historian, when he attempts
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 231 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
to describe the disorders, which arose from faction throughout all the Grecian
commonwealths. You would imagine, that he still labours with a thought greater than
he can find words to communicate. And he concludes his pathetic description with an
observation, which is at once refined and solid. “In these contests,” says he, “those
who were the dullest, and most stupid, and had the least foresight, commonly
prevailed. For being conscious of this weakness, and dreading to be overreached by
those of greater penetration, they went to work hastily, without premeditation, by the
sword and poinard, and thereby got the start of their antagonists, who were forming
fine schemes and projects for their destruction.”84
Not to mention Dionysius85 the elder, who is computed to have butchered in cool
blood above 10,000 of his fellow-citizens; or Agathocles,86Nabis,87 and others, still
more bloody than he; the transactions, even in free governments, were extremely
violent and destructive. At Athens, the thirty tyrants and the nobles, in a twelvemonth,
murdered, without trial, about 1200 of the people, and banished above the half of the
citizens that remained.88 In Argos, near the same time, the people killed 1200 of the
nobles; and afterwards their own demagogues, because they had refused to carry their
prosecutions farther.89 The people also in Corcyra killed 1500 of the nobles, and
banished a thousand.90 These numbers will appear the more surprising, if we consider
the extreme smallness of these states. But all ancient history is full of such
instances.91
When Alexander ordered all the exiles to be restored throughout all the cities; it was
found, that the whole amounted to 20,000 men;92 the remains probably of still greater
slaughters and massacres. What an astonishing multitude in so narrow a country as
ancient Greece! And what domestic confusion, jealousy, partiality, revenge,
heartburnings, must tear those cities, where factions were wrought up to such a degree
of fury and despair.
It would be easier, says Isocrates to Philip, to raise an army in Greece at present from
the vagabonds than from the cities.93
Even when affairs came not to such extremities (which they failed not to do almost in
every city twice or thrice every century) property was rendered very precarious by the
maxims of ancient government. Xenophon, in the Banquet of Socrates, gives us a
natural unaffected description of the tyranny of the Athenian people. “In my poverty,”
says Charmides, “I am much more happy than I ever was while possessed of riches: as
much as it is happier to be in security than in terrors, free than a slave, to receive than
to pay court, to be trusted than suspected. Formerly I was obliged to caress every
informer; some imposition was continually laid upon me; and it was never allowed
me to travel, or be absent from the city. At present, when I am poor I look big, and
threaten others. The rich are afraid of me, and show me every kind of civility and
respect; and I am become a kind of tyrant in the city.”94
In one of the pleadings of Lysias,95 the orator very coolly speaks of it, by the by, as a
maxim of the Athenian people, that, whenever they wanted money, they put to death
some of the rich citizens as well as strangers, for the sake of the forfeiture. In
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 232 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
mentioning this, he seems not to have any intention of blaming them; still less of
provoking them, who were his audience and judges.
Whether a man was a citizen or a stranger among that people, it seems indeed
requisite, either that he should impoverish himself, or that the people would
impoverish him, and perhaps kill him into the bargain. The orator last mentioned
gives a pleasant account of an estate laid out in the public service;96 that is, above the
third of it in raree-shows° and figured dances.
I need not insist on the Greek tyrannies, which were altogether horrible. Even the
mixed monarchies, by which most of the ancient states of Greece were governed,
before the introduction of republics, were very unsettled. Scarcely any city, but
Athens, says Isocrates, could show a succession of kings for four or five
generations.97
Besides many other obvious reasons for the instability of ancient monarchies, the
equal division of property among the brothers in private families, must, by a
necessary consequence, contribute to unsettle and disturb the state. The universal
preference given to the elder by modern laws, though it encreases the inequality of
fortunes, has, however, this good effect, that it accustoms men to the same idea in
public succession, and cuts off all claim and pretension of the younger.
The new settled colony of Heraclea, falling immediately into faction applied to
Sparta, who sent Heripidas with full authority to quiet their dissentions. This man, not
provoked by any opposition, not inflamed by party rage, knew no better expedient
than immediately putting to death about 500 of the citizens.98 A strong proof how
deeply rooted these violent maxims of government were throughout all Greece.
If such was the disposition of men’s minds among that refined people, what may be
expected in the commonwealths of Italy, Afric, Spain, and Gaul, which were
denominated barbarous? Why otherwise did the Greeks so much value themselves on
their humanity, gentleness, and moderation, above all other nations? This reasoning
seems very natural. But unluckily the history of the Roman commonwealth, in its
earlier times, if we give credit to the received accounts, presents an opposite
conclusion. No blood was ever shed in any sedition at Rome, till the murder of the
Gracchi. Dionysius Halicarnassæus,99 observing the singular humanity of the Roman
people in this particular, makes use of it as an argument that they were originally of
Grecian extraction: Whence we may conclude, that the factions and revolutions in the
barbarous republics were usually more violent than even those of Greece abovementioned.
If the Romans were so late in coming to blows, they made ample compensation, after
they had once entered upon the bloody scene; and Appian’s history of their civil wars
contains the most frightful picture of massacres, proscriptions, and forfeitures, that
ever was presented to the world. What pleases most, in that historian, is, that he seems
to feel a proper resentment of these barbarous proceedings; and talks not with that
provoking coolness and indifference, which custom had produced in many of the
Greek historians.100
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 233 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The maxims of ancient politics contain, in general, so little humanity and moderation,
that it seems superfluous to give any particular reason for the acts of violence
committed at any particular period. Yet I cannot forbear observing, that the laws, in
the later period of the Roman commonwealth, were so absurdly contrived, that they
obliged the heads of parties to have recourse to these extremities. All capital
punishments were abolished: However criminal, or, what is more, however dangerous
any citizen might be, he could not regularly be punished otherwise than by
banishment: And it became necessary, in the revolutions of party, to draw the sword
of private vengeance; nor was it easy, when laws were once violated, to set bounds to
these sanguinary proceedings. Had Brutus himself prevailed over the triumvirate,
could he, in common prudence, have allowed Octavius and Anthony, to live, and have
contented himself with banishing them to Rhodes or Marseilles, where they might still
have plotted new commotions and rebellions? His executing C. Antonius, brother to
the triumvir, shows evidently his sense of the matter. Did not Cicero, with the
approbation of all the wise and virtuous of Rome, arbitrarily put to death Catiline’s
accomplices, contrary to law, and without any trial or form of process? And if he
moderated his executions, did it not proceed, either from the clemency of his temper,
or the conjunctures of the times? A wretched security in a government which pretends
to laws and liberty!
Thus, one extreme produces another. In the same manner as excessive severity in the
laws is apt to beget great relaxation in their execution; so their excessive lenity
naturally produces cruelty and barbarity. It is dangerous to force us, in any case, to
pass their sacred boundaries.
One general cause of the disorders, so frequent in all ancient governments, seems to
have consisted in the great difficulty of establishing any Aristocracy in those ages,
and the perpetual discontents and seditions of the people, whenever even the meanest
and most beggarly were excluded from the legislature and from public offices. The
very quality of freemen gave such a rank, being opposed to that of slave, that it
seemed to entitle the possessor to every power and privilege of the commonwealth.
Solon’s101 laws excluded no freeman from votes or elections, but confined some
magistracies to a particular census; yet were the people never satisfied till those laws
were repealed. By the treaty with Antipater,102 no Athenian was allowed a vote
whose census was less than 2000 drachmas (about 60 l. Sterling). And though such a
government would to us appear sufficiently democratical, it was so disagreeable to
that people, that above two-thirds of them immediately left their
country.103Cassander reduced that census to the half;104 yet still the government was
considered as an oligarchical tyranny, and the effect of foreign violence.
Servius Tullius’s105 laws seem equal and reasonable, by fixing the power in
proportion to the property: Yet the Roman people could never be brought quietly to
submit to them.
In those days there was no medium between a severe, jealous Aristocracy, ruling over
discontented subjects; and a turbulent, factious, tyrannical Democracy.r At present,
there is not one republic in Europe, from one extremity of it to the other, that is not
remarkable for justice, lenity, and stability, equal to, or even beyond Marseilles,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 234 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Rhodes, or the most celebrated in antiquity. Almost all of them are well-tempered
Aristocracies.
But thirdly, there are many other circumstances, in which ancient nations seem
inferior to the modern, both for the happiness and encrease of mankind. Trade,
manufactures, industry, were no where, in former ages, so flourishing as they are at
present in Europe. The only garb of the ancients, both for males and females, seems to
have been a kind of flannel, which they wore commonly white or grey, and which
they scoured as often as it became dirty. Tyre, which carried on, after Carthage, the
greatest commerce of any city in the Mediterranean, before it was destroyed by
Alexander, was no mighty city, if we credit Arrian’s account of its
inhabitants.106Athens is commonly supposed to have been a trading city: But it was
as populous before the Median war as at any time after it, according to Herodotus;107
yet its commerce, at that time, was so inconsiderable, that, as the same historian
observes,108 even the neighbouring coasts of Asia were as little frequented by the
Greeks as the pillars of Hercules: For beyond these he conceived nothing.
Great interest of money, and great profits of trade, are an infallible indication, that
industry and commerce are but in their infancy. We read in Lysias109 of 100 per cent.
profit made on a cargo of two talents, sent to no greater distance than from Athens to
the Adriatic: Nor is this mentioned as an instance of extraordinary profit. Antidorus,
says Demosthenes,110 paid three talents and a half for a house which he let at a talent
a year: And the orator blames his own tutors for not employing his money to like
advantage. My fortune, says he, in eleven years minority, ought to have been tripled.
The value of 20 of the slaves left by his father, he computes at 40 minas, and the
yearly profit of their labour at 12.111 The most moderate interest at Athens, (for there
was higher112 often paid) was 12 per cent.,113 and that paid monthly. Not to insist
upon the high interest, to which the vast sums distributed in elections had raised
money114 at Rome, we find, that Verres, before that factious period, stated 24 per
cent. for money which he left in the hands of the publicans: And though Cicero
exclaims against this article, it is not on account of the extravagant usury; but because
it had never been customary to state any interest on such occasions.115 Interest,
indeed, sunk at Rome, after the settlement of the empire: But it never remained any
considerable time so low, as in the commercial states of modern times.116
Among the other inconveniencies, which the Athenians felt from the fortifying of
Decelia by the Lacedemonians, it is represented by Thucydides,117 as one of the most
considerable, that they could not bring over their corn from Eubea by land, passing by
Oropus; but were obliged to embark it, and to sail round the promontory of Sunium. A
surprising instance of the imperfection of ancient navigation! For the water-carriage is
not here above double the land.
I do not remember a passage in any ancient author, where the growth of a city is
ascribed to the establishment of a manufacture. The commerce, which is said to
flourish, is chiefly the exchange of those commodities, for which different soils and
climates were suited. The sale of wine and oil into Africa, according to Diodorus
Siculus,118 was the foundation of the riches of Agrigentum. The situation of the city
of Sybaris, according to the same author119 was the cause of its immense
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 235 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
populousness; being built near the two rivers Crathys and Sybaris. But these two
rivers, we may observe, are not navigable; and could only produce some fertile
vallies, for agriculture and tillage; an advantage so inconsiderable, that a modern
writer would scarcely have taken notice of it.
The barbarity of the ancient tyrants, together with the extreme love of liberty, which
animated those ages, must have banished every merchant and manufacturer, and have
quite depopulated the state, had it subsisted upon industry and commerce. While the
cruel and suspicious Dionysius was carrying on his butcheries, who, that was not
detained by his landed property, and could have carried with him any art or skill to
procure a subsistence in other countries, would have remained exposed to such
implacable barbarity? The persecutions of Philip II. and Lewis XIV. filled all Europe
with the manufacturers of Flanders and of France.
I grant, that agriculture is the species of industry chiefly requisite to the subsistence of
multitudes; and it is possible, that this industry may flourish, even where
manufactures and other arts are unknown and neglected. Swisserland is at present a
remarkable instance; where we find, at once, the most skilful husbandmen, and the
most bungling tradesmen, that are to be met with in Europe. That agriculture
flourished in Greece and Italy, at least in some parts of them, and at some periods, we
have reason to presume; And whether the mechanical arts had reached the same
degree of perfection, may not be esteemed so material; especially, if we consider the
great equality of riches in the ancient republics, where each family was obliged to
cultivate, with the greatest care and industry, its own little field, in order to its
subsistence.
But is it just reasoning, because agriculture may, in some instances, flourish without
trade or manufactures, to conclude, that, in any great extent of country, and for any
great tract of time, it would subsist alone? The most natural way, surely, of
encouraging husbandry, is, first, to excite other kinds of industry, and thereby afford
the labourer a ready market for his commodities, and a return of such goods as may
contribute to his pleasure and enjoyment. This method is infallible and universal; and,
as it prevails more in modern government than in the ancient, it affords a presumption
of the superior populousness of the former.
Every man, says Xenophon,120 may be a farmer: No art or skill is requisite: All
consists in industry, and in attention to the execution. A strong proof, as Columella
hints, that agriculture was but little known in the age of Xenophon
All our later improvements and refinements, have they done nothing towards the easy
subsistence of men, and consequently towards their propagation and encrease? Our
superior skill in mechanics; the discovery of new worlds, by which commerce has
been so much enlarged; the establishment of posts; and the use of bills of exchange:
These seem all extremely useful to the encouragement of art, industry, and
populousness. Were we to strike off these, what a check should we give to every kind
of business and labour, and what multitudes of families would immediately perish
from want and hunger? And it seems not probable, that we could supply the place of
these new inventions by any other regulation or institution.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 236 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Have we reason to think, that the police of ancient states was any wise comparable to
that of modern, or that men had then equal security, either at home, or in their journies
by land or water? I question not, but every impartial examiner would give us the
preference in this particular.121
Thus, upon comparing the whole, it seems impossible to assign any just reason, why
the world should have been more populous in ancient than in modern times. The
equality of property among the ancients, liberty, and the small divisions of their states,
were indeed circumstances favourable to the propagation of mankind: But their wars
were more bloody and destructive, their governments more factious and unsettled,
commerce and manufactures more feeble and languishing, and the general police
more loose and irregular. These latter disadvantages seem to form a sufficient
counterbalance to the former advantages; and rather favour the opposite opinion to
that which commonly prevails with regard to this subject.
But there is no reasoning, it may be said, against matter of fact. If it appear, that the
world was then more populous than at present, we may be assured, that our
conjectures are false, and that we have overlooked some material circumstance in the
comparison. This I readily own: All our preceding reasonings, I acknowledge to be
mere trifling, or, at least, small skirmishes and frivolous rencounters, which decide
nothing. But unluckily the main combat, where we compare facts, cannot be rendered
much more decisive. The facts, delivered by ancient authors, are either so uncertain or
so imperfect as to afford us nothing positive in this matter. How indeed could it be
otherwise? The very facts, which we must oppose to them, in computing the
populousness of modern states, are far from being either certain or complete. Many
grounds of calculation proceeded on by celebrated writers, are little better than those
of the Emperor Heliogabalus, who formed an estimate of the immense greatness of
Rome, from ten thousand pound weight of cobwebs which had been found in that
city.122
It is to be remarked, that all kinds of numbers are uncertain in ancient manuscripts,
and have been subject to much greater corruptions than any other part of the text; and
that for an obvious reason. Any alteration, in other places, commonly affects the sense
or grammar, and is more readily perceived by the reader and transcriber.
Few enumerations of inhabitants have been made of any tract of country by any
ancient author of good authority, so as to afford us a large enough view for
comparison.
It is probable, that there was formerly a good foundation for the number of citizens
assigned to any free city; because they entered for a share in the government, and
there were exact registers kept of them. But as the number of slaves is seldom
mentioned, this leaves us in as great uncertainty as ever, with regard to the
populousness even of single cities.
The first page of Thucydides is, in my opinion, the commencement of real history. All
preceding narrations are so intermixed with fable, that philosophers ought to abandon
them, in a great measure, to the embellishment of poets and orators.123
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 237 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
With regard to remote times, the numbers of people assigned are often ridiculous, and
lose all credit and authority. The free citizens of Sybaris, able to bear arms, and
actually drawn out in battle, were 300,000. They encountered at Siagra with 100,000
citizens of Crotona, another Greek city contiguous to them; and were defeated. This is
Diodorus Siculus’s124 account; and is very seriously insisted on by that historian.
Strabo125 also mentions the same number of Sybarites.
Diodorus Siculus,126 enumerating the inhabitants of Agrigentum, when it was
destroyed by the Carthaginians, says, that they amounted to 20,000 citizens, 200,000
strangers, besides slaves, who, in so opulent a city as he represents it, would probably
be, at least, as numerous. We must remark, that the women and the children are not
included; and that, therefore, upon the whole, this city must have contained near two
millions of inhabitants.127 And what was the reason of so immense an encrease!
They were industrious in cultivating the neighbouring fields, not exceeding a small
English county; and they traded with their wine and oil to Africa, which, at that time,
produced none of these commodities.
Ptolemy, says Theocritus,128 commands 33,339 cities. I suppose the singularity of
the number was the reason of assigning it. Diodorus Siculus129 assigns three millions
of inhabitants to Ægypt, a small number: But then he makes the number of cities
amount to 18,000: An evident contradiction.
He says,130 the people were formerly seven millions. Thus remote times are always
most envied and admired.
That Xerxes’s army was extremely numerous, I can readily believe; both from the
great extent of his empire, and from the practice among the eastern nations, of
encumbering their camp with a superfluous multitude: But will any rational man cite
Herodotus’s wonderful narrations as an authority? There is something very rational, I
own, in Lysias’s131 argument upon this subject. Had not Xerxes’s army been
incredibly numerous, says he, he had never made a bridge over the Hellespont: It had
been much easier to have transported his men over so short a passage, with the
numerous shipping of which he was master.
Polybius132 says, that the Romans, between the first and second Punic wars, being
threatened with an invasion from the Gauls, mustered all their own forces, and those
of their allies, and found them amount to seven hundred thousand men able to bear
arms: A great number surely, and which, when joined to the slaves, is probablys not
less, if not rather more, than that extent of country affords at present.133 The
enumeration too seems to have been made with some exactness; and Polybius gives
us the detail of the particulars. But might not the number be magnified, in order to
encourage the people?
Diodorus Siculus134 makes the same enumeration amount to near a million. These
variations are suspicious. He plainly too supposes, that Italy in his time was not so
populous: Another suspicious circumstance. For who can believe, that the inhabitants
of that country diminished from the time of the first Punic war to that of the
triumvirates?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 238 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Julius Cæsar according to Appian,135 encountered four millions of Gauls, killed one
million, and made another million prisoners.136 Supposing the number of the
enemy’s army and that of the slain could be exactly assigned, which never is possible;
how could it be known how often the same man returned into the armies, or how
distinguish the new from the old levied soldiers? No attention ought ever to be given
to such loose, exaggerated calculations; especially where the author does not tell us
the mediums, upon which the calculations were founded.
Paterculus137 makes the number of Gauls killed by Cæsar amount only to 400,000: A
more probable account, and more easily reconciled to the history of these wars given
by that conqueror himself in his Commentaries.138v The most bloody of his battles
were fought against the Helvetii and the Germans.
One would imagine, that every circumstance of the life and actions of Dionysius the
elder might be regarded as authentic, and free from all fabulous exaggeration; both
because he lived at a time when letters flourished most in Greece, and because his
chief historian was Philistus, a man allowed to be of great genius, and who was a
courtier and minister of that prince. But can we admit, that he had a standing army of
100,000 foot, 10,000 horse, and a fleet of 400 gallies?139 These, we may observe,
were mercenary forces, and subsisted upon pay, like our armies in Europe. For the
citizens were all disarmed; and when Dion afterwards invaded Sicily, and called on
his countrymen to vindicate their liberty, he was obliged to bring arms along with
him, which he distributed among those who joined him.140 In a state where
agriculture alone flourishes, there may be many inhabitants; and if these be all armed
and disciplined, a great force may be called out upon occasion: But great bodies of
mercenary troops can never be maintained, without either great trade and numerous
manufactures, or extensive dominions. The United Provinces never were masters of
such a force by sea and land, as that which is said to belong to Dionysius; yet they
possess as large a territory, perfectly well cultivated, and have much more resources
from their commerce and industry. Diodorus Siculus allows, that, even in his time, the
army of Dionysius appeared incredible; that is, as I interpret it, was entirely a fiction,
and the opinion arose from the exaggerated flattery of the courtiers, and perhaps from
the vanity and policy of the tyrant himself.w
It is a usual fallacy, to consider all the ages of antiquity as one period, and to compute
the numbers contained in the great cities mentioned by ancient authors, as if these
cities had been all cotemporary. The Greek colonies flourished extremely in Sicily
during the age of Alexander: But in Augustus’s time they were so decayed, that
almost all the produce of that fertile island was consumed in Italy.141
Let us now examine the numbers of inhabitants assigned to particular cities in
antiquity; and omitting the numbers of Nineveh, Babylon, and the Egyptian Thebes,
let us confine ourselves to the sphere of real history, to the Grecian and Roman states.
I must own, the more I consider this subject, the more am I inclined to scepticism,
with regard to the great populousness ascribed to ancient times.
Athens is said by Plato142 to be a very great city; and it was surely the greatest of all
the Greek143 cities, except Syracuse, which was nearly about the same size in
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 239 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Thucydides’s144 time, and afterwards encreased beyond it. For Cicero145 mentions it
as the greatest of all the Greek cities in his time; not comprehending, I suppose, either
Antioch or Alexandria under that denomination. Athenæus146 says, that, by the
enumeration of Demetrius Phalereus, there were in Athens 21,000 citizens, 10,000
strangers, and 400,000 slaves. This number is much insisted on by those whose
opinion I call in question, and is esteemed a fundamental fact to their purpose: But, in
my opinion, there is no point of criticism more certain, than that Athenæus and
Ctesicles, whom he quotes, are here mistaken, and that the number of slaves is, at
least, augmented by a whole cypher, and ought not to be regarded as more than
40,000.
First, When the number of citizens is said to be 21,000 by Athenæus,147 men of full
age are only understood. For, (1.) Herodotus says,148 that Aristagoras, ambassador
from the Ionians, found it harder to deceive one Spartan than 30,000 Athenians;
meaning, in a loose way, the whole state, supposed to be met in one popular
assembly, excluding the women and children. (2.) Thucydides149 says, that, making
allowance for all the absentees in the fleet, army, garrisons, and for people employed
in their private affairs, the Athenian assembly never rose to five thousand. (3.) The
forces, enumerated by the same historian,150 being all citizens, and amounting to
13,000 heavy-armed infantry, prove the same method of calculation; as also the whole
tenor of the Greek historians, who always understand men of full age, when they
assign the number of citizens in any republic. Now, these being but the fourth of the
inhabitants, the free Athenians were by this account 84,000; the strangers 40,000; and
the slaves, calculating by the smaller number, and allowing that they married and
propagated at the same rate with freemen, were 160,000; and the whole of the
inhabitants 284,000: A number surely large enough. The other number, 1,720,000,
makes Athens larger than London and Paris united.
Secondly, There were but 10,000 houses in Athens.151
Thirdly, Though the extent of the walls, as given us by Thucydides,152 be great, (to
wit, eighteen miles, beside the sea-coast): Yet Xenophon153 says, there was much
waste ground within the walls. They seem indeed to have joined four distinct and
separate cities.154
Fourthly, No insurrection of the slaves, or suspicion of insurrection, is ever mentioned
by historians; except one commotion of the miners.155
Fifthly, The treatment of slaves by the Athenians is said by Xenophon,156 and
Demosthenes,157 and Plautus,158 to have been extremely gentle and indulgent:
Which could never have been the case, had the disproportion been twenty to one. The
disproportion is not so great in any of our colonies; yet are we obliged to exercise a
rigorous military government over the negroes.
Sixthly, No man is ever esteemed rich for possessing what may be reckoned an equal
distribution of property in any country, or even triple or quadruple that wealth. Thus
every person in England is computed by some to spend six-pence a day: Yet is he
esteemed but poor who has five times that sum. Now Timarchus is said by
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 240 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Æschines159 to have been left in easy circumstances; but he was master only of ten
slaves employed in manufactures. Lysias and his brother, two strangers, were
proscribed by the thirty for their great riches; though they had but sixty apiece.160Demosthenes
was left very rich by his father; yet he had no more than fiftytwo
slaves.161 His workhouse, of twenty cabinet-makers, is said to be a very
considerable manufactory.162
Seventhly, During the Decelian war, as the Greek historians call it, 20,000 slaves
deserted, and brought the Athenians to great distress, as we learn from
Thucydides.163 This could not have happened, had they been only the twentieth part.
The best slaves would not desert.
Eighthly,Xenophon164 proposes a scheme for maintaining by the public 10,000
slaves: And that so great a number may possibly be supported, any one will be
convinced, says he, who considers the numbers we possessed before the Decelian
war. A way of speaking altogether incompatible with the larger number of Athenæus.
Ninthly, The whole census of the state of Athens was less than 6000 talents. And
though numbers in ancient manuscripts be often suspected by critics, yet this is
unexceptionable; both because Demosthenes,165 who gives it, gives also the detail,
which checks him; and because Polybius166 assigns the same number, and reasons
upon it. Now, the most vulgar slave could yield by his labour an obolus a day, over
and above his maintenance, as we learn from Xenophon,167 who says, that Nicias’s
overseer paid his master so much for slaves, whom he employed inx mines. If you
will take the pains to estimate an obolus a day, and the slaves at 400,000, computing
only at four years purchase, you will find the sum above 12,000 talents; even though
allowance be made for the great number of holidays in Athens. Besides, many of the
slaves would have a much greater value from their art. The lowest that Demosthenes
estimates any of his168 father’s slaves is two minas a head. And upon this
supposition, it is a little difficult, I confess, to reconcile even the number of 40,000
slaves with the census of 6000 talents.
Tenthly,Chios is said by Thucydides,169 to contain more slaves than any Greek city,
except Sparta. Sparta then had more than Athens, in proportion to the number of
citizens. The Spartans were 9000 in the town, 30,000 in the country.170 The male
slaves, therefore, of full age, must have been more than 780,000;171 the whole more
than 3,120,000. A number impossible to be maintained in a narrow barren country,
such as Laconia, which had no trade. Had the Helotes been so very numerous, the
murder of 2000 mentioned by Thucydides,172 would have irritated them, without
weakening them.
Besides, we are to consider, that the number assigned by Athenæus,173 whatever it is,
comprehends all the inhabitants of Attica, as well as those of Athens. The Athenians
affected much a country life, as we learn from Thucydides;174 and when they were
all chased into town, by the invasion of their territory during the Peloponnesian war,
the city was not able to contain them; and they were obliged to lie in the porticoes,
temples, and even streets, for want of lodging.175
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 241 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The same remark is to be extended to all the other Greek cities; and when the number
of citizens is assigned, we must always understand it to comprehend the inhabitants of
the neighbouring country, as well as of the city. Yet, even with this allowance, it must
be confessed, that Greece was a populous country, and exceeded what we could
imagine concerning so narrow a territory, naturally not very fertile, and which drew
no supplies of corn from other places. For, excepting Athens, which traded to Pontus
for that commodity, the other cities seem to have subsisted chiefly from their
neighbouring territory.176
Rhodes is well known to have been a city of extensive commerce, and of great fame
and splendor; yet it contained only 6000 citizens able to bear arms, when it was
besieged by Demetrius.177
Thebes was always one of the capital cities of Greece:178 But the number of its
citizens exceeded not those of Rhodes.179Phliasia is said to be a small city by
Xenophon,180 yet we find, that it contained 6000 citizens.181 I pretend not to
reconcile these two facts.aa Perhaps, Xenophon calls Phliasia a small town, because it
made but a small figure in Greece, and maintained only a subordinate alliance with
Sparta; or perhaps the country, belonging to it, was extensive, and most of the citizens
were employed in the cultivation of it, and dwelt in the neighbouring villages.
Mantinea was equal to any city in Arcadia:182 Consequently it was equal to
Megalopolis, which was fifty stadia, or six miles and a quarter in circumference.183
But Mantinea had only 3000 citizens.184 The Greek cities, therefore, contained often
fields and gardens, together with the houses; and we cannot judge of them by the
extent of their walls. Athens contained no more than 10,000 houses; yet its walls, with
the sea-coast, were above twenty miles in extent. Syracuse was twenty-two miles in
circumference; yet was scarcely ever spoken of by the ancients as more populous than
Athens. Babylon was a square of fifteen miles, or sixty miles in circuit; but it
contained large cultivated fields and inclosures, as we learn from Pliny. Though
Aurelian’s wall was fifty miles in circumference;185 the circuit of all the thirteen
divisions of Rome, taken apart, according to Publius Victor,186 was only about fortythree
miles. When an enemy invaded the country, all the inhabitants retired within the
walls of the ancient cities, with their cattle and furniture, and instruments of
husbandry: and the great height, to which the walls were raised, enabled a small
number to defend them with facility.
Sparta, says Xenophon,187 is one of the cities of Greece that has the fewest
inhabitants. Yet Polybius188 says, that it was forty-eight stadia in circumference, and
was round.
All the Ætolians able to bear arms in Antipater’s time, bb deducting some few
garrisons, were but ten thousand men.189
Polybius190 tells us, that the Achæan league might, without any inconvenience,
march 30 or 40,000 men: And this account seems probable: For that league
comprehended the greater part of Peloponnesus. Yet Pausanias,191 speaking of the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 242 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
same period, says, that all the Achæans able to bear arms, even when several
manumitted slaves were joined to them, did not amount to fifteen thousand.
The Thessalians, till their final conquest by the Romans, were, in all ages, turbulent,
factious, seditious, disorderly.192 It is not therefore natural to suppose, that this part
of Greece abounded much in people.
cc We are told by Thucydides,193 that the part of Peloponnesus, adjoining to Pylos,
was desart and uncultivated. Herodotus says,194 that Macedonia was full of lions and
wild bulls; animals which can only inhabit vast unpeopled forests. These were the two
extremities of Greece.
All the inhabitants of Epirus, of all ages, sexes and conditions, who were sold by
Paulus Æmilius, amounted only to 150,000.195 Yet Epirus might be double the extent
of Yorkshire.dd
eeJustin196 tells us, that, when Philip of Macedon was declared head of the Greek
confederacy, he called a congress of all the states, except the Lacedemonians, who
refused to concur; and he found the force of the whole, upon computation, to amount
to 200,000 infantry, and 15,000 cavalry. This must be understood to be all the citizens
capable of bearing arms. For as the Greek republics maintained no mercenary forces,
and had no militia distinct from the whole body of the citizens, it is not conceivable
what other medium there could be of computation. That such an army could ever, by
Greece, be brought into the field, and be maintained there, is contrary to all history.
Upon this supposition, therefore, we may thus reason. The free Greeks of all ages and
sexes were 860,000. The slaves, estimating them by the number of Athenian slaves as
above, who seldom married or had families, were double the male citizens of full age,
to wit, 430,000. And all the inhabitants of ancient Greece, excepting Laconia, were
about one million two hundred and ninety thousand: No mighty number, nor
exceeding what may be found at present in Scotland, a country of not much greater
extent, and very indifferently peopled.
We may now consider the numbers of people in Rome and Italy, and collect all the
lights afforded us by scattered passages in ancient authors. We shall find, upon the
whole, a great difficulty, in fixing any opinion on that head; and no reason to support
those exaggerated calculations, so much insisted on by modern writers.
Dionysius Halicarnassæus197 says, that the ancient walls of Rome were nearly of the
same compass with those of Athens, but that the suburbs ran out to a great extent; and
it was difficult to tell, where the town ended or the country began. In some places of
Rome, it appears, from the same author,198 from Juvenal,199 and from other ancient
writers,200 that the houses were high, and families lived in separate storeys, one
above another: But it is probable, that these were only the poorer citizens, and only in
some few streets. If we may judge from the younger Pliny’s201 account of his own
house, and from Bartoli’s202 plans of ancient buildings, the men of quality had very
spacious palaces; and their buildings were like the Chinese houses at this day, where
each apartment is separated from the rest, and rises no higher than a single storey. To
which if we add, that the Roman nobility much affected extensive porticoes, and even
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 243 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
woods203 in town; we may perhaps allow Vossius (though there is no manner of
reason for it) to read the famous passage of the elder Pliny204 his own way, without
admitting the extravagant consequences which he draws from it.
The number of citizens who received corn by the public distribution in the time of
Augustus, were two hundred thousand.205 This one would esteem a pretty certain
ground of calculation: Yet is it attended with such circumstances as throw us back
into doubt and uncertainty.
Did the poorer citizens only receive the distribution? It was calculated, to be sure,
chiefly for their benefit. But it appears from a passage in Cicero206 that the rich
might also take their portion, and that it was esteemed no reproach in them to apply
for it.
To whom was the corn given; whether only to heads of families, or to every man,
woman, and child? The portion every month was five modii to each207 (about ? of a
bushel). This was too little for a family, and too much for an individual. A very
accurate antiquary,208 therefore, infers, that it was given to every man of full age:
But he allows the matter to be uncertain.
Was it strictly enquired, whether the claimant lived within the precincts of Rome; or
was it sufficient, that he presented himself at the monthly distribution? This last seems
more probable.209
Were there no false claimants? We are told,210 that Cæsar struck off at once 170,000,
who had creeped in without a just title; and it is very little probable, that he remedied
all abuses.
But, lastly, what proportion of slaves must we assign to these citizens? This is the
most material question; and the most uncertain. It is very doubtful, whether Athens
can be established as a rule for Rome. Perhaps the Athenians had more slaves,
because they employed them in manufactures, for which a capital city, like Rome,
seems not so proper. Perhaps, on the other hand, the Romans had more slaves, on
account of their superior luxury and riches.
There were exact bills of mortality kept at Rome; but no ancient author has given us
the number of burials, except Suetonius,211 who tells us, that in one season, there
were 30,000 names carried to the temple of Libitina: But this was during a plague;
which can afford no certain foundation for any inference.
The public corn, though distributed only to 200,000 citizens, affected very
considerably the whole agriculture of Italy:212 a fact no wise reconcileable to some
modern exaggerations with regard to the inhabitants of that country.
The best ground of conjecture I can find concerning the greatness of ancient Rome, is
this: We are told by Herodian,213 that Antioch and Alexandria were very little
inferior to Rome. It appears from Diodorus Siculus,214 that one straight street of
Alexandria reaching from gate to gate, was five miles long; and as Alexandria was
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 244 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
much more extended in length than breadth, it seems to have been a city nearly of the
bulk of Paris;215 and Rome might be about the size of London.
There lived in Alexandria, in Diodorus Siculus’s time,216 300,000 free people,
comprehending, I suppose, women and children.217 But what number of slaves? Had
we any just ground to fix these at an equal number with the free inhabitants, it would
favour the foregoing computation.
There is a passage in Herodian, which is a little surprising. He says positively, that the
palace of the Emperor was as large as all the rest of the city.218 This was Nero’s
golden house, which is indeed represented by Suetonius219 and Pliny as of an
enormous extent,220 but no power of imagination can make us conceive it to bear any
proportion to such a city as London.
We may observe, had the historian been relating Nero’s extravagance, and had he
made use of such an expression, it would have had much less weight; these rhetorical
exaggerations being so apt to creep into an author’s style, even when the most chaste
and correct. But it is mentioned by Herodian only by the by, in relating the quarrels
between Geta and Caracalla.
It appears from the same historian,221 that there was then much land uncultivated,
and put to no manner of use; and he ascribes it as a great praise to Pertinax, that he
allowed every one to take such land either in Italy or elsewhere, and cultivate it as he
pleased, without paying any taxes. Lands uncultivated, and put to no manner of use!
This is not heard of in any part of Christendom; except in some remote parts of
Hungary; as I have been informed. And it surely corresponds very ill with that idea of
the extreme populousness of antiquity, so much insisted on.
We learn from Vopiscus,222 that there was even in Etruria much fertile land
uncultivated, which the Emperor Aurelian intended to convert into vineyards, in order
to furnish the Roman people with a gratuitous distribution of wine; a very proper
expedient for depopulating still farther that capital and all the neighbouring territories.
It may not be amiss to take notice of the account which Polybius223 gives of the great
herds of swine to be met with in Tuscany and Lombardy, as well as in Greece, and of
the method of feeding them which was then practised. “There are great herds of
swine,” says he, “throughout all Italy, particularly in former times, through Etruria
and Cisalpine Gaul. And a herd frequently consists of a thousand or more swine.
When one of these herds in feeding meets with another, they mix together; and the
swine-herds have no other expedient for separating them than to go to different
quarters, where they sound their horn; and these animals, being accustomed to that
signal, run immediately each to the horn of his own keeper. Whereas in Greece, if the
herds of swine happen to mix in the forests, he who has the greater flock, takes
cunningly the opportunity of driving all away. And thieves are very apt to purloin the
straggling hogs, which have wandered to a great distance from their keeper in search
of food.”
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 245 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
May we not infer from this account, that the north of Italy, as well as Greece, was
then much less peopled, and worse cultivated, than at present? How could these vast
herds be fed in a country so full of inclosures, so improved by agriculture, so divided
by farms, so planted with vines and corn intermingled together? I must confess, that
Polybius’s relation has more the air of that œconomy which is to be met with in our
American colonies, than the management of a European country.
We meet with a reflection in Aristotle’s224 Ethics, which seems unaccountable on
any supposition, and by proving too much in favour of our present reasoning, may be
thought really to prove nothing. That philosopher, treating of friendship, and
observing, that this relation ought neither to be contracted to a very few, nor extended
over a great multitude, illustrates his opinion by the following argument. “In like
manner,” says he, “as a city cannot subsist, if it either have so few inhabitants as ten,
or so many as a hundred thousand; so is there a mediocrity required in the number of
friends; and you destroy the essence of friendship by running into either extreme.”
What! impossible that a city can contain a hundred thousand inhabitants! Had
Aristotle never seen nor heard of a city so populous? This, I must own, passes my
comprehension.
Pliny225 tells us that Seleucia, the seat of the Greek empire in the East, was reported
to contain 600,000 people. Carthage is said by Strabo226 to have contained 700,000.
The inhabitants of Pekin are not much more numerous. London, Paris, and
Constantinople, may admit of nearly the same computation; at least, the two latter
cities do not exceed it. Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, we have already spoken of. From
the experience of past and present ages, one might conjecture that there is a kind of
impossibility, that any city could ever rise much beyond this proportion. Whether the
grandeur of a city be founded on commerce or on empire, there seem to be invincible
obstacles, which prevent its farther progress. The seats of vast monarchies, by
introducing extravagant luxury, irregular expence, idleness, dependence, and false
ideas of rank and superiority, are improper for commerce. Extensive commerce
checks itself, by raising the price of all labour and commodities. When a great court
engages the attendance of a numerous nobility, possessed of overgrown fortunes, the
middling gentry remain in their provincial towns, where they can make a figure on a
moderate income. And if the dominions of a state arrive at an enormous size, there
necessarily arise many capitals, in the remoter provinces, whither all the inhabitants,
except a few courtiers, repair for education, fortune, and amusement.227London, by
uniting extensive commerce and middling empire, has, perhaps, arrived at a greatness,
which no city will ever be able to exceed.
Chuse Dover or Calais for a center: Draw a circle of two hundred miles radius: You
comprehend London, Paris, the Netherlands, the United Provinces, and some of the
best cultivated parts of France and England. It may safely, I think, be affirmed, that no
spot of ground can be found, in antiquity, of equal extent, which contained near so
many great and populous cities, and was so stocked with riches and inhabitants. To
balance, in both periods, the states, which possessed most art, knowledge, civility, and
the best police, seems the truest method of comparison.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 246 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
It is an observation of L’Abbe du Bos,228 that Italy is warmer at present than it was
in ancient times. “The annals of Rome tell us,” says he, “that in the year 480 ab U.C.
the winter was so severe that it destroyed the trees. The Tyber froze in Rome, and the
ground was covered with snow for forty days. When Juvenal229 describes a
superstitious woman, he represents her as breaking the ice of the Tyber, that she might
perform her ablutions:
Hybernum fracta glacie descendet in amnem,
Ter matutino Tyberi mergetur.
He speaks of that river’s freezing as a common event. Many passages of Horace
suppose the streets of Rome full of snow and ice. We should have more certainty with
regard to this point, had the ancients known the use of thermometers: But their
writers, without intending it, give us information, sufficient to convince us, that the
winters are now much more temperate at Rome than formerly. At present the Tyber
no more freezes at Rome than the Nile at Cairo. The Romans esteem the winters very
rigorous, if the snow lie two days, and if one see for eight and forty hours a few
icicles hang from a fountain that has a north exposure.”
The observation of this ingenious critic may be extended to other European climates.
Who could discover the mild climate of France in Diodorus Siculus’s230 description
of that of Gaul? “As it is a northern climate,” says he, “it is infested with cold to an
extreme degree. In cloudy weather, instead of rain there fall great snows; and in clear
weather it there freezes so excessive hard, that the rivers acquire bridges of their own
substance, over which, not only single travellers may pass, but large armies,
accompanied with all their baggage and loaded waggons. And there being many rivers
in Gaul, the Rhone, the Rhine, &c. almost all of them are frozen over; and it is usual,
in order to prevent falling, to cover the ice with chaff and straw at the places where
the road passes.” ffColder than aGallicWinter, is used by Petronius231 as a proverbial
expression. Aristotle says, that Gaul is so cold a climate that an ass could not live in
it.232
North of the Cevennes, says Strabo,233Gaul produces not figs and olives: And the
vines, which have been planted, bear not grapes, that will ripen.
Ovid positively maintains, with all the serious affirmation of prose, that the Euxine
sea was frozen over every winter in his time; and he appeals to Roman governours,
whom he names, for the truth of his assertion.234 This seldom or never happens at
present in the latitude of Tomi, whither Ovid was banished. All the complaints of the
same poet seem to mark a rigour of the seasons, which is scarcely experienced at
present in Petersburgh or Stockholm.
Tournefort, a Provençal, who had travelled into the same country, observes, that there
is not a finer climate in the world: And he asserts, that nothing but Ovid’s melancholy
could have given him such dismal ideas of it.235 But the facts, mentioned by that
poet, are too circumstantial to bear any such interpretation.
Polybius236 says, that the climate in Arcadia was very cold, and the air moist.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 247 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
“Italy,” says Varro,237 “is the most temperate climate in Europe. The inland parts”
(Gaul, Germany, and Pannonia, no doubt) “have almost perpetual winter.”
The northern parts of Spain, according to Strabo,238 are but ill inhabited, because of
the great cold.
Allowing, therefore, this remark to be just, that Europe is become warmer than
formerly; how can we account for it? Plainly, by no other method, than by supposing,
that the land is at present much better cultivated, and that the woods are cleared,
which formerly threw a shade upon the earth, and kept the rays of the sun from
penetrating to it. Our northern colonies in America become more temperate, in
proportion as the woods are felled;239 but in general, every one may remark, that cold
is still much more severely felt, both in North and South America, than in places
under the same latitude in Europe.
Saserna, quoted by Columella,240 affirmed, that the disposition of the heavens was
altered before his time, and that the air had become much milder and warmer; as
appears hence, says he, that many places now abound with vineyards and olive
plantations, which formerly, by reason of the rigour of the climate, could raise none of
these productions. Such a change, if real, will be allowed an evident sign of the better
cultivation and peopling of countries before the age of Saserna;241 and if it be
continued to the present times, is a proof, that these advantages have been continually
encreasing throughout this part of the world.
Let us now cast our eye over all the countries which are the scene of ancient and
modern history, and compare their past and present situation: We shall not, perhaps,
find such foundation for the complaint of the present emptiness and desolation of the
world. Ægypt is represented by Maillet, to whom we owe the best account of it,242 as
extremely populous; though he esteems the number of its inhabitants to be
diminished. Syria, and the Lesser Asia, as well as the coast of Barbary, I can readily
own, to be desart in comparison of their ancient condition. The depopulation of
Greece is also obvious. But whether the country now called Turky in Europe may not,
in general, contain more inhabitants than during the flourishing period of Greece, may
be a little doubtful. The Thracians seem then to have lived like the Tartars at present,
by pasturage and plunder:243 The Getes were still more uncivilized:244 And the
Illyrians were no better.245 These occupy nine-tenths of that country: And though the
government of the Turks be not very favourable to industry and propagation; yet it
preserves at least peace and order among the inhabitants; and is preferable to that
barbarous, unsettled condition, in which they anciently lived.
Poland and Muscovy in Europe are not populous; but are certainly much more so than
the ancient Sarmatia and Scythia; where no husbandry or tillage was ever heard of,
and pasturage was the sole art by which the people were maintained. The like
observation may be extended to Denmark and Sweden. No one ought to esteem the
immense swarms of people, which formerly came from the North, and over-ran all
Europe, to be any objection to this opinion. Where a whole nation, or even half of it
remove their seat; it is easy to imagine, what a prodigious multitude they must form;
with what desperate valour they must make their attacks; and how the terror they
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 248 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
strike into the invaded nations will make these magnify, in their imagination, both the
courage and multitude of the invaders. Scotland is neither extensive nor populous; but
were the half of its inhabitants to seek new seats, they would form a colony as
numerous as the Teutons and Cimbri; and would shake all Europe, supposing it in no
better condition for defence than formerly.
Germany has surely at present twenty times more inhabitants than in ancient times,
when they cultivated no ground, and each tribe valued itself on the extensive
desolation which it spread around; as we learn from Cæsar,246 and Tacitus,247 and
Strabo.248 A proof, that the division into small republics will not alone render a
nation populous, unless attended with the spirit of peace, order, and industry.
The barbarous condition of Britain in former times is well known, and the thinness of
its inhabitants may easily be conjectured, both from their barbarity, and from a
circumstance mentioned by Herodian,249 that all Britain was marshy, even in
Severus’s time, after the Romans had been fully settled in it above a century.
It is not easily imagined, that the Gauls were anciently much more advanced in the
arts of life than their northern neighbours; since they travelled to this island for their
education in the mysteries of the religion and philosophy of the Druids.250 I cannot,
therefore, think, that Gaul was then near so populous as France is at present.
Were we to believe, indeed, and join together the testimony of Appian, and that of
Diodorus Siculus, we must admit of an incredible populousness in Gaul. The former
historian251 says, that there were 400 nations in that country; the latter252 affirms,
that the largest of the Gallic nations consisted of 200,000 men, besides women and
children, and the least of 50,000. Calculating, therefore, at a medium, we must admit
of near 200 millions of people, in a country, which we esteem populous at present,
though supposed to contain little more than twenty.253 Such calculations, therefore,
by their extravagance, lose all manner of authority. We may observe, that the equality
of property, to which the populousness of antiquity may be ascribed, had no place
among the Gauls.254 Their intestine wars also, before Cæsar’s time, were almost
perpetual.255 And Strabo256 observes, that, though all Gaul was cultivated, yet was it
not cultivated with any skill or care; the genius of the inhabitants leading them less to
arts than arms, till their slavery under Rome produced peace among themselves.
Cæsar257 enumerates very particularly the great forces which were levied in Belgium
to oppose his conquests; and makes them amount to 208,000. These were not the
whole people able to bear arms: For the same historian tells us, that the Bellovaci
could have brought a hundred thousand men into the field, though they engaged only
for sixty. Taking the whole, therefore, in this proportion of ten to six, gg the sum of
fighting men in all the states of Belgium was about 350,000; all the inhabitants a
million and a half. And Belgium being about a fourth of Gaul, that country might
contain six millions, which is nothh near the third of its present inhabitants.258jj We
are informed by Cæsar, that the Gauls had no fixed property in land; but that the
chieftains, when any death happened in a family, made a new division of all the lands
among the several members of the family. This is the custom of Tanistry, which so
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 249 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
long prevailed in Ireland, and which retained that country in a state of misery,
barbarism, and desolation.
The ancient Helvetia was 250 miles in length, and 180 in breadth, according to the
same author;259 yet contained only 360,000 inhabitants. The canton of Berne alone
has, at present, as many people.
After this computation of Appian and Diodorus Siculus, I know not, whether I dare
affirm, that the modern Dutch are more numerous than the ancient Batavi.
Spain is, perhaps, decayed from what it was three centuries ago; but if we step
backward two thousand years, and consider the restless, turbulent, unsettled condition
of its inhabitants, we may probably be inclined to think, that it is now much more
populous. Many Spaniards killed themselves, when deprived of their arms by the
Romans.260 It appears from Plutarch,261 that robbery and plunder were esteemed
honourable among the Spaniards. Hirtius262 represents in the same light the situation
of that country in Cæsar’s time; and he says, that every man was obliged to live in
castles and walled towns for his security. It was not till its final conquest under
Augustus, that these disorders were repressed.263 The account which Strabo264 and
Justin265 give of Spain, corresponds exactly with those above mentioned. How much,
therefore, must it diminish from our idea of the populousness of antiquity, when we
find, that Tully, comparing Italy, Afric, Gaul, Greece, and Spain, mentions the great
number of inhabitants, as the peculiar circumstance, which rendered this latter country
formidable?266
Italy, however, it is probable, has decayed: But how many great cities does it still
contain? Venice, Genoa, Pavia, Turin, Milan, Naples, Florence, Leghorn, which either
subsisted not in ancient times, or were then very inconsiderable? If we reflect on this,
we shall not be apt to carry matters to so great an extreme as is usual, with regard to
this subject.
When the Roman authors complain, that Italy, which formerly exported corn, became
dependent on all the provinces for its daily bread, they never ascribe this alteration to
the encrease of its inhabitants, but to the neglect of tillage and agriculture.267 A
natural effect of that pernicious practice of importing corn, in order to distribute it
gratis among the Roman citizens, and a very bad means of multiplying the inhabitants
of any country.268 The sportula, so much talked of by Martial and Juvenal, being
presents regularly made by the great lords to their smaller clients, must have had a
like tendency to produce idleness, debauchery, and a continual decay among the
people. The parish-rates have at present the same bad consequences in England.
Were I to assign a period, when I imagine this part of the world might possibly
contain more inhabitants than at present, I should pitch upon the age of Trajan and the
Antonines;269 the great extent of the Roman empire being then civilized and
cultivated, settled almost in a profound peace both foreign and domestic, and living
under the same regular police and government.270 But we are told, that all extensive
governments, especially absolute monarchies, are pernicious to population, and
contain a secret vice and poison, which destroy the effect of all these promising
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 250 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
appearances.271 To confirm this, there is a passage cited from Plutarch,272 which
being somewhat singular, we shall here examine it.
That author, endeavouring to account for the silence of many of the oracles, says, that
it may be ascribed to the present desolation of the world, proceeding from former
wars and factions; which common calamity, he adds, has fallen heavier upon Greece
than on any other country; insomuch, that the whole could scarcely at present furnish
three thousand warriors; a number which, in the time of the Median war, were
supplied by the single city of Megara. The gods, therefore, who affect works of
dignity and importance, have suppressed many of their oracles, and deign not to use
so many interpreters of their will to so diminutive a people.
I must confess, that this passage contains so many difficulties, that I know not what to
make of it. You may observe, that Plutarch assigns, for a cause of the decay of
mankind, not the extensive dominion of the Romans, but the former wars and factions
of the several states; all which were quieted by the Roman arms. Plutarch’s reasoning,
therefore, is directly contrary to the inference, which is drawn from the fact he
advances.
Polybius supposes, that Greece had become more prosperous and flourishing after the
establishment of the Roman yoke;273 and though that historian wrote before these
conquerors had degenerated, from being the patrons, to be the plunderers of mankind;
yet as we find from Tacitus,274 that the severity of the emperors afterwards corrected
the licence of the governors, we have no reason to think that extensive monarchy so
destructive as it is often represented.
We learn from Strabo,275 that the Romans, from their regard to the Greeks,
maintained, to his time, most of the privileges and liberties of that celebrated nation;
and Nero afterwards rather encreased them.276 How therefore can we imagine, that
the Roman yoke was so burdensome over that part of the world? The oppression of
the proconsuls was checked; and the magistracies in Greece being all bestowed, in the
several cities, by the free votes of the people, there was no necessity for the
competitors to attend the emperor’s court. If great numbers went to seek their fortunes
in Rome, and advance themselves by learning or eloquence, the commodities of their
native country, many of them would return with the fortunes which they had acquired,
and thereby enrich the Grecian commonwealths.
But Plutarch says, that the general depopulation had been more sensibly felt in Greece
than in any other country. How is this reconcileable to its superior privileges and
advantages?
Besides, this passage, by proving too much, really proves nothing. Only three
thousand men able to bear arms in allGreece! Who can admit so strange a
proposition, especially if we consider the great number of Greek cities, whose names
still remain in history, and which are mentioned by writers long after the age of
Plutarch? There are there surely ten times more people at present, when there scarcely
remains a city in all the bounds of ancient Greece. That country is still tolerably
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 251 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
cultivated, and furnishes a sure supply of corn, in case of any scarcity in Spain, Italy,
or the south of France.
We may observe, that the ancient frugality of the Greeks, and their equality of
property, still subsisted during the age of Plutarch; as appears from Lucian.277 Nor is
there any ground to imagine, that that country was possessed by a few masters, and a
great number of slaves.
It is probable, indeed, that military discipline, being entirely useless, was extremely
neglected in Greece after the establishment of the Roman empire; and if these
commonwealths, formerly so warlike and ambitious, maintained each of them a small
city-guard, to prevent mobbish disorders, it is all they had occasion for: And these,
perhaps, did not amount to 3000 men, throughout all Greece. I own, that, if Plutarch
had this fact in his eye, he is here guilty of a gross paralogism,° and assigns causes no
wise proportioned to the effects. But is it so great a prodigy, that an author should fall
into a mistake of this nature?278
But whatever force may remain in this passage of Plutarch, we shall endeavour to
counterbalance it by as remarkable a passage in Diodorus Siculus, where the historian,
after mentioning Ninus’s army of 1,700,000 foot and 200,000 horse, endeavours to
support the credibility of this account by some posterior facts; and adds, that we must
not form a notion of the ancient populousness of mankind from the present emptiness
and depopulation which is spread over the world.279 Thus an author, who lived at
that very period of antiquity which is represented as most populous,280 complains of
the desolation which then prevailed, gives the preference to former times, and has
recourse to ancient fables as a foundation for his opinion. The humour of blaming the
present, and admiring the past, is strongly rooted in human nature, and has an
influence even on persons endued with the profoundest judgment and most extensive
learning.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 252 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XII
OF THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT
As no party, in the present age, can well support itself, without a philosophical or
speculative system of principles, annexed to its political or practical one; we
accordingly find, that each of the factions, into which this nation is divided, has reared
up a fabric of the former kind, in order to protect and cover that scheme of actions,
which it pursues.1 The people being commonly very rude builders, especially in this
speculative way, and more especially still, when actuated by party-zeal; it is natural to
imagine, that their workmanship must be a little unshapely, and discover evident
marks of that violence and hurry, in which it was raised. The one party, by tracing up
government to the Deity, endeavour to render it so sacred and inviolate, that it must
be little less than sacrilege, however tyrannical it may become, to touch or invade it,
in the smallest article. The other party, by founding government altogether on the
consent of the People, suppose that there is a kind of original contract, by which the
subjects have tacitly reserved the power of resisting their sovereign, whenever they
find themselves aggrieved by that authority, with which they have, for certain
purposes, voluntarily entrusted him. These are the speculative principles of the two
parties; and these too are the practical consequences deduced from them.
I shall venture to affirm, That both these systems of speculative principles are just;
though not in the sense, intended by the parties: And, That both the schemes of
practical consequences are prudent; though not in the extremes, to which each party,
in opposition to the other, has commonly endeavoured to carry them.
That the Deity is the ultimate author of all government, will never be denied by any,
who admit a general providence, and allow, that all events in the universe are
conducted by an uniform plan, and directed to wise purposes. As it is impossible for
the human race to subsist, at least in any comfortable or secure state, without the
protection of government; this institution must certainly have been intended by that
beneficent Being, who means the good of all his creatures: And as it has universally,
in fact, taken place, in all countries, and all ages; we may conclude, with still greater
certainty, that it was intended by that omniscient Being, who can never be deceived
by any event or operation. But since he gave rise to it, not by any particular or
miraculous interposition, but by his concealed and universal efficacy; a sovereign
cannot, properly speaking, be called his vice-gerent, in any other sense than every
power or force, being derived from him, may be said to act by his commission.
Whatever actually happens is comprehended in the general plan or intention of
providence; nor has the greatest and most lawful prince any more reason, upon that
account, to plead a peculiar sacredness or inviolable authority, than an inferior
magistrate, or even an usurper, or even a robber and a pyrate. The same divine
superintendant, who, for wise purposes, invested a a Titus or a Trajan with authority,
did also, for purposes, no doubt, equally wise, though unknown, bestow power on a
Borgia or an Angria.2 The same causes, which gave rise to the sovereign power in
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 253 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
every state, established likewise every petty jurisdiction in it, and every limited
authority. A constable, therefore, no less than a king, acts by a divine commission,
and possesses an indefeasible right.
When we consider how nearly equal all men are in their bodily force, and even in
their mental powers and faculties, till cultivated by education; we must necessarily
allow, that nothing but their own consent could, at first, associate them together, and
subject them to any authority. The people, if we trace government to its first origin in
the woods and desarts, are the source of all power and jurisdiction, and voluntarily,
for the sake of peace and order, abandoned their native liberty, and received laws
from their equal and companion. The conditions, upon which they were willing to
submit, were either expressed, or were so clear and obvious, that it might well be
esteemed superfluous to express them. If this, then, be meant by the original contract,
it cannot be denied, that all government is, at first, founded on a contract, and that the
most ancient rude combinations of mankind were formed chiefly by that principle. In
vain, are we asked in what records this charter of our liberties is registered. It was not
written on parchment, nor yet on leaves or barks of trees. It preceded the use of
writing and all the other civilized arts of life. But we trace it plainly in the nature of
man, and in the equality, b or something approaching equality, which we find in all
the individuals of that species. The force, which now prevails, and which is founded
on fleets and armies, is plainly political, and derived from authority, the effect of
established government. A man’s natural force consists only in the vigour of his
limbs, and the firmness of his courage; which could never subject multitudes to the
command of one. Nothing but their own consent, and their sense of the advantages
resulting from peace and order, could have had that influence.
c Yet even this consent was long very imperfect, and could not be the basis of a
regular administration. The chieftain, who had probably acquired his influence during
the continuance of war, ruled more by persuasion than command; and till he could
employ force to reduce the refractory and disobedient, the society could scarcely be
said to have attained a state of civil government. No compact or agreement, it is
evident, was expressly formed for general submission; an idea far beyond the
comprehension of savages: Each exertion of authority in the chieftain must have been
particular, and called forth by the present exigencies of the case: The sensible utility,
resulting from his interposition, made these exertions become daily more frequent;
and their frequency gradually produced an habitual, and, if you please to call it so, a
voluntary, and therefore precarious, acquiescence in the people.
But philosophers, who have embraced a party (if that be not a contradiction in terms)
are not contented with these concessions. They assert, not only that government in its
earliest infancy arose from consent or rather the voluntary acquiescence of the people;
but also, that, even at present, when it has attained full maturity, it rests on no other
foundation.3 They affirm, that all men are still born equal, and owe allegiance to no
prince or government, unless bound by the obligation and sanction of a promise. And
as no man, without some equivalent, would forego the advantages of his native
liberty, and subject himself to the will of another; this promise is always understood
to be conditional, and imposes on him no obligation, unless he meet with justice and
protection from his sovereign. These advantages the sovereign promises him in return;
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 254 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and if he fail in the execution, he has broken, on his part, the articles of engagement,
and has thereby freed his subject from all obligations to allegiance. Such, according to
these philosophers, is the foundation of authority in every government; and such the
right of resistance, possessed by every subject.
But would these reasoners look abroad into the world, they would meet with nothing
that, in the least, corresponds to their ideas, or can warrant so refined and
philosophical a system. On the contrary, we find, every where, princes, who claim
their subjects as their property, and assert their independent right of sovereignty, from
conquest or succession. We find also, every where, subjects, who acknowledge this
right in their prince, and suppose themselves born under obligations of obedience to a
certain sovereign, as much as under the ties of reverence and duty to certain parents.
These connexions are always conceived to be equally independent of our consent, in
Persia and China; in France and Spain; and even in Holland and England, wherever
the doctrines above-mentioned have not been carefully inculcated. Obedience or
subjection becomes so familiar, that most men never make any enquiry about its
origin or cause, more than about the principle of gravity, resistance, or the most
universal laws of nature. Or if curiosity ever move them; as soon as they learn, that
they themselves and their ancestors have, for several ages, or from time immemorial,
been subject to such a form of government or such a family; they immediately
acquiesce, and acknowledge their obligation to allegiance. Were you to preach, in
most parts of the world, that political connexions are founded altogether on voluntary
consent or a mutual promise, the magistrate would soon imprison you, as seditious,
for loosening the ties of obedience; if your friends did not before shut you up as
delirious, for advancing such absurdities. It is strange, that an act of the mind, which
every individual is supposed to have formed, and after he came to the use of reason
too, otherwise it could have no authority; that this act, I say, should be so much
unknown to all of them, that, over the face of the whole earth, there scarcely remain
any traces or memory of it.
But the contract, on which government is founded, is said to be the original contract;
and consequently may be supposed too old to fall under the knowledge of the present
generation. If the agreement, by which savage men first associated and conjoined their
force, be here meant, this is acknowledged to be real; but being so ancient, and being
obliterated by a thousand changes of government and princes, it cannot now be
supposed to retain any authority. If we would say any thing to the purpose, we must
assert, that every particular government, which is lawful, and which imposes any duty
of allegiance on the subject, was, at first, founded on consent and a voluntary
compact. But besides that this supposes the consent of the fathers to bind the children,
even to the most remote generations, (which republican writers will never allow)
besides this, I say, it is not justified by history or experience, in any age or country of
the world.
Almost all the governments, which exist at present, or of which there remains any
record in story, have been founded originally, either on usurpation or conquest, or
both, without any pretence of a fair consent, or voluntary subjection of the people.
When an artful and bold man is placed at the head of an army or faction, it is often
easy for him, by employing, sometimes violence, sometimes false pretences, to
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 255 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
establish his dominion over a people a hundred times more numerous than his
partizans. He allows no such open communication, that his enemies can know, with
certainty, their number or force. He gives them no leisure to assemble together in a
body to oppose him. Even all those, who are the instruments of his usurpation, may
wish his fall; but their ignorance of each other’s intention keeps them in awe, and is
the sole cause of his security. By such arts as these, many governments have been
established; and this is all the original contract, which they have to boast of.
The face of the earth is continually changing, by the encrease of small kingdoms into
great empires, by the dissolution of great empires into smaller kingdoms, by the
planting of colonies, by the migration of tribes. Is there any thing discoverable in all
these events, but force and violence? Where is the mutual agreement or voluntary
association so much talked of?
Even the smoothest way, by which a nation may receive a foreign master, by marriage
or a will, is not extremely honourable for the people; but supposes them to be
disposed of, like a dowry or a legacy, according to the pleasure or interest of their
rulers.
But where no force interposes, and election takes place; what is this election so highly
vaunted? It is either the combination of a few great men, who decide for the whole,
and will allow of no opposition: Or it is the fury of a multitude, that follow a seditious
ringleader, who is not known, perhaps, to a dozen among them, and who owes his
advancement merely to his own impudence, or to the momentary caprice of his
fellows.
Are these disorderly elections, which are rare too, of such mighty authority, as to be
the only lawful foundation of all government and allegiance?
In reality, there is not a more terrible event, than a total dissolution of government,
which gives liberty to the multitude, and makes the determination or choice of a new
establishment depend upon a number, which nearly approaches to that of the body of
the people: For it never comes entirely to the whole body of them. Every wise man,
then, wishes to see, at the head of a powerful and obedient army, a general, who may
speedily seize the prize, and give to the people a master, which they are so unfit to
chuse for themselves. So little correspondent is fact and reality to those philosophical
notions.
Let not the establishment at the Revolution deceive us, or make us so much in love
with a philosophical origin to government, as to imagine all others monstrous and
irregular. Even that event was far from corresponding to these refined ideas. It was
only the succession, and that only in the regal part of the government, which was then
changed: And it was only the majority of seven hundred, who determined that change
for near ten millions.4 I doubt not, indeed, but the bulk of those ten millions
acquiesced willingly in the determination: But was the matter left, in the least, to their
choice? Was it not justly supposed to be, from that moment, decided, and every man
punished, who refused to submit to the new sovereign? How otherwise could the
matter have ever been brought to any issue or conclusion?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 256 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The republic of Athens was, I believe, the most extensive democracy, that we read of
in history: Yet if we make the requisite allowances for the women, the slaves, and the
strangers, we shall find, that that establishment was not, at first, made, nor any law
ever voted, by a tenth part of those who were bound to pay obedience to it: Not to
mention the islands and foreign dominions, which the Athenians claimed as theirs by
right of conquest. And as it is well known, that popular assemblies in that city were
always full of licence and disorder, notwithstanding the institutions and laws by
which they were checked: How much more disorderly must they prove, where they
form not the established constitution, but meet tumultuously on the dissolution of the
ancient government, in order to give rise to a new one? How chimerical must it be to
talk of a choice in such circumstances?
d The Achæans enjoyed the freest and most perfect democracy of all antiquity; yet
they employed force to oblige some cities to enter into their league, as we learn from
Polybius.5
Harry the IVth6 and Harry the VIIth of England, had really no title to the throne but a
parliamentary election; yet they never would acknowledge it, lest they should thereby
weaken their authority. Strange, if the only real foundation of all authority be consent
and promise!
It is in vain to say, that all governments are or should be, at first, founded on popular
consent, as much as the necessity of human affairs will admit. This favours entirely
my pretension. I maintain, that human affairs will never admit of this consent; seldom
of the appearance of it. But that conquest or usurpation, that is, in plain terms, force,
by dissolving the ancient governments, is the origin of almost all the new ones, which
were ever established in the world. And that in the few cases, where consent may
seem to have taken place, it was commonly so irregular, so confined, or so much
intermixed either with fraud or violence, that it cannot have any great authority.
e My intention here is not to exclude the consent of the people from being one just
foundation of government where it has place. It is surely the best and most sacred of
any. I only pretend, that it has very seldom had place in any degree, and never almost
in its full extent. And that therefore some other foundation of government must also
be admitted.
Were all men possessed of so inflexible a regard to justice, that, of themselves, they
would totally abstain from the properties of others; they had° for ever remained in a
state of absolute liberty, without subjection to any magistrate or political society: But
this is a state of perfection, of which human nature is justly deemed incapable. Again;
were all men possessed of so perfect an understanding, as always to know their own
interests, no form of government had ever been submitted to, but what was
established on consent, and was fully canvassed by every member of the society: But
this state of perfection is likewise much superior to human nature. Reason, history,
and experience shew us, that all political societies have had an origin much less
accurate and regular; and were one to choose a period of time, when the people’s
consent was the least regarded in public transactions, it would be precisely on the
establishment of a new government. In a settled constitution, their inclinations are
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 257 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
often consulted; but during the fury of revolutions, conquests, and public convulsions,
military force or political craft usually decides the controversy.
When a new government is established, by whatever means, the people are commonly
dissatisfied with it, and pay obedience more from fear and necessity, than from any
idea of allegiance or of moral obligation. The prince is watchful and jealous, and must
carefully guard against every beginning or appearance of insurrection. Time, by
degrees, removes all these difficulties, and accustoms the nation to regard, as their
lawful or native princes, that family, which, at first, they considered as usurpers or
foreign conquerors. In order to found this opinion, they have no recourse to any
notion of voluntary consent or promise, which, they know, never was, in this case,
either expected or demanded. The original establishment was formed by violence, and
submitted to from necessity. The subsequent administration is also supported by
power, and acquiesced in by the people, not as a matter of choice, but of obligation.
They imagine not, that their consent gives their prince a title: But they willingly
consent, because they think, that, from long possession, he has acquired a title,
independent of their choice or inclination.
Should it be said, that, by living under the dominion of a prince, which one might
leave, every individual has given a tacit consent to his authority, and promised him
obedience; it may be answered, that such an implied consent can only have place,
where a man imagines, that the matter depends on his choice. But where he thinks (as
all mankind do who are born under established governments) that by his birth he owes
allegiance to a certain prince or certain form of government; it would be absurd to
infer a consent or choice, which he expressly, in this case, renounces and disclaims.
Can we seriously say, that a poor peasant or artizan has a free choice to leave his
country, when he knows no foreign language or manners, and lives from day to day,
by the small wages which he acquires? We may as well assert, that a man, by
remaining in a vessel, freely consents to the dominion of the master; though he was
carried on board while asleep, and must leap into the ocean, and perish, the moment
he leaves her.
What if the prince forbid his subjects to quit his dominions; as in Tiberius’s time, it
was regarded as a crime in a Roman knight that he had attempted to fly to the
Parthians, in order to escape the tyranny of that emperor?7 Or as the ancient
Muscovites prohibited all travelling under pain of death? And did a prince observe,
that many of his subjects were seized with the frenzy of migrating to foreign
countries, he would doubtless, with great reason and justice, restrain them, in order to
prevent the depopulation of his own kingdom. Would he forfeit the allegiance of all
his subjects, by so wise and reasonable a law? Yet the freedom of their choice is
surely, in that case, ravished from them.
A company of men, who should leave their native country, in order to people some
uninhabited region, might dream of recovering their native freedom; but they would
soon find, that their prince still laid claim to them, and called them his subjects, even
in their new settlement. And in this he would but act conformably to the common
ideas of mankind.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 258 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The truest tacit consent of this kind, that is ever observed, is when a foreigner settles
in any country, and is beforehand acquainted with the prince, and government, and
laws, to which he must submit: Yet is his allegiance, though more voluntary, much
less expected or depended on, than that of a natural born subject. On the contrary, his
native prince still asserts a claim to him. And if he punish not the renegade, when he
seizes him in war with his new prince’s commission; this clemency is not founded on
the municipal law, which in all countries condemns the prisoner; but on the consent of
princes, who have agreed to this indulgence, in order to prevent reprisals.
f Did one generation of men go off the stage at once, and another succeed, as is the
case with silk-worms and butterflies, the new race, if they had sense enough to choose
their government, which surely is never the case with men, might voluntarily, and by
general consent, establish their own form of civil polity, without any regard to the
laws or precedents, which prevailed among their ancestors. But as human society is in
perpetual flux, one man every hour going out of the world, another coming into it, it is
necessary, in order to preserve stability in government, that the new brood should
conform themselves to the established constitution, and nearly follow the path which
their fathers, treading in the footsteps of theirs, had marked out to them. Some
innovations must necessarily have place in every human institution, and it is happy
where the enlightened genius of the age give these a direction to the side of reason,
liberty, and justice: but violent innovations no individual is entitled to make: they are
even dangerous to be attempted by the legislature: more ill than good is ever to be
expected from them: and if history affords examples to the contrary, they are not to be
drawn into precedent, and are only to be regarded as proofs, that the science of
politics affords few rules, which will not admit of some exception, and which may not
sometimes be controuled by fortune and accident. The violent innovations in the reign
of Henry VIII.8 proceeded from an imperious monarch, seconded by the appearance
of legislative authority: Those in the reign of Charles I. were derived from faction and
fanaticism; and both of them have proved happy in the issue: But even the former
were long the source of many disorders, and still more dangers; and if the measures of
allegiance were to be taken from the latter, a total anarchy must have place in human
society, and a final period at once be put to every government.
Suppose, that an usurper, after having banished his lawful prince and royal family,
should establish his dominion for ten or a dozen years in any country, and should
preserve so exact a discipline in his troops, and so regular a disposition in his
garrisons, that no insurrection had ever been raised, or even murmur heard, against his
administration: Can it be asserted, that the people, who in their hearts abhor his
treason, have tacitly consented to his authority, and promised him allegiance, merely
because, from necessity, they live under his dominion? Suppose again their native
prince restored, by means of an army, which he levies in foreign countries: They
receive him with joy and exultation, and shew plainly with what reluctance they had
submitted to any other yoke. I may now ask, upon what foundation the prince’s title
stands? Not on popular consent surely: For though the people willingly acquiesce in
his authority, they never imagine, that their consent made him sovereign. They
consent; because they apprehend him to be already, by birth, their lawful sovereign.
And as to that tacit consent, which may now be inferred from their living under his
dominion, this is no more than what they formerly gave to the tyrant and usurper.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 259 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
When we assert, that all lawful government arises from the consent of the people, we
certainly do them a great deal more honour than they deserve, or even expect and
desire from us. After the Roman dominions became too unwieldly for the republic to
govern them, the people, over the whole known world, were extremely grateful to
Augustus for that authority, which, by violence, he had established over them; and
they shewed an equal disposition to submit to the successor, whom he left them, by
his last will and testament. It was afterwards their misfortune, that there never was, in
one family, any long regular succession; but that their line of princes was continually
broken, either by private assassinations or public rebellions. The prætorian bands, on
the failure of every family, set up one emperor; the legions in the East a second; those
in Germany, perhaps, a third: And the sword alone could decide the controversy. The
condition of the people, in that mighty monarchy, was to be lamented, not because the
choice of the emperor was never left to them; for that was impracticable: But because
they never fell under any succession of masters, who might regularly follow each
other. As to the violence and wars and bloodshed, occasioned by every new
settlement; these were not blameable, because they were inevitable.
The house of Lancaster ruled in this island about sixty years;g yet the partizans of the
white rose seemed daily to multiply in England.9 The present establishment has taken
place during a still longer period. Have all views of right in another family been
utterly extinguished; even though scarce any man now alive had arrived at years of
discretion, when it was expelled, or could have consented to its dominion, or have
promised it allegiance? A sufficient indication surely of the general sentiment of
mankind on this head. For we blame not the partizans of the abdicated family, merely
on account of the long time, during which they have preserved their imaginary
loyalty. We blame them for adhering to a family, which, we affirm, has been justly
expelled, and which, from the moment the new settlement took place, had forfeited all
title to authority.
But would we have a more regular, at least a more philosophical, refutation of this
principle of an original contract or popular consent; perhaps, the following
observations may suffice.
All moral duties may be divided into two kinds.10 The first are those, to which men
are impelled by a natural instinct or immediate propensity, which operates on them,
independent of all ideas of obligation, and of all views, either to public or private
utility. Of this nature are, love of children, gratitude to benefactors, pity to the
unfortunate. When we reflect on the advantage, which results to society from such
humane instincts, we pay them the just tribute of moral approbation and esteem: But
the person, actuated by them, feels their power and influence, antecedent to any such
reflection.
The second kind of moral duties are such as are not supported by any original instinct
of nature, but are performed entirely from a sense of obligation, when we consider the
necessities of human society, and the impossibility of supporting it, if these duties
were neglected. It is thus justice or a regard to the property of others, fidelity or the
observance of promises, become obligatory, and acquire an authority over mankind.
For as it is evident, that every man loves himself better than any other person, he is
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 260 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
naturally impelled to extend his acquisitions as much as possible; and nothing can
restrain him in this propensity, but reflection and experience, by which he learns the
pernicious effects of that licence, and the total dissolution of society which must
ensue from it. His original inclination, therefore, or instinct, is here checked and
restrained by a subsequent judgment or observation.
The case is precisely the same with the political or civil duty of allegiance, as with the
natural duties of justice and fidelity.11 Our primary instincts lead us, either to indulge
ourselves in unlimited freedom, or to seek dominion over others: And it is reflection
only, which engages us to sacrifice such strong passions to the interests of peace and
public order. A small degree of experience and observation suffices to teach us, that
society cannot possibly be maintained without the authority of magistrates, and that
this authority must soon fall into contempt, where exact obedience is not payed to it.
The observation of these general and obvious interests is the source of all allegiance,
and of that moral obligation, which we attribute to it.
What necessity, therefore, is there to found the duty of allegiance or obedience to
magistrates on that of fidelity or a regard to promises, and to suppose, that it is the
consent of each individual, which subjects him to government; when it appears, that
both allegiance and fidelity stand precisely on the same foundation, and are both
submitted to by mankind, on account of the apparent interests and necessities of
human society? We are bound to obey our sovereign, it is said; because we have given
a tacit promise to that purpose. But why are we bound to observe our promise? It must
here be asserted, that the commerce and intercourse of mankind, which are of such
mighty advantage, can have no security where men pay no regard to their
engagements. In like manner, may it be said, that men could not live at all in society,
at least in a civilized society, without laws and magistrates and judges, to prevent the
encroachments of the strong upon the weak, of the violent upon the just and equitable.
The obligation to allegiance being of like force and authority with the obligation to
fidelity, we gain nothing by resolving the one into the other. The general interests or
necessities of society are sufficient to establish both.
If the reason be asked of that obedience, which we are bound to pay to government, I
readily answer, because society could not otherwise subsist: And this answer is clear
and intelligible to all mankind. Your answer is, because we should keep our word. But
besides, that no body, till trained in a philosophical system, can either comprehend or
relish this answer: Besides this, I say, you find yourself embarrassed, when it is asked,
why we are bound to keep our word? Nor can you give any answer, but what would,
immediately, without any circuit, have accounted for our obligation to allegiance.
But to whom is allegiance due? And who is our lawful sovereign? This question is
often the most difficult of any, and liable to infinite discussions.12 When people are
so happy, that they can answer, Our present sovereign, who inherits, in a direct line,
from ancestors, that have governed us for many ages; this answer admits of no reply;
even though historians, in tracing up to the remotest antiquity, the origin of that royal
family, may find, as commonly happens, that its first authority was derived from
usurpation and violence. It is confessed, that private justice, or the abstinence from the
properties of others, is a most cardinal virtue: Yet reason tells us, that there is no
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 261 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
property in durable objects, such as lands or houses, when carefully examined in
passing from hand to hand, but must, in some period, have been founded on fraud and
injustice. The necessities of human society, neither in private nor public life, will
allow of such an accurate enquiry: And there is no virtue or moral duty, but what may,
with facility, be refined away, if we indulge a false philosophy, in sifting and
scrutinizing it, by every captious rule of logic, in every light or position, in which it
may be placed.
The questions with regard to private property have filled infinite volumes of law and
philosophy, if in both we add the commentators to the original text; and in the end, we
may safely pronounce, that many of the rules, there established, are uncertain,
ambiguous, and arbitrary.13 The like opinion may be formed with regard to the
succession and rights of princes and forms of government.h Several cases, no doubt,
occur, especially in the infancy of any constitution, which admit of no determination
from the laws of justice and equity: And our historian Rapin14 pretends,i that the
controversy between Edward the Third and Philip de Valois was of this nature, and
could be decided only by an appeal to heaven, that is, by war and violence.
Who shall tell me, whether Germanicus or Drusus ought to have succeeded to
Tiberius, had he died, while they were both alive, without naming any of them for his
successor?15 Ought the right of adoption to be received as equivalent to that of blood,
in a nation, where it had the same effect in private families, and had already, in two
instances, taken place in the public? Ought Germanicus to be esteemed the elder son
because he was born before Drusus; or the younger, because he was adopted after the
birth of his brother? Ought the right of the elder to be regarded in a nation, where he
had no advantage in the succession of private families? Ought the Roman empire at
that time to be deemed hereditary, because of two examples; or ought it, even so
early, to be regarded as belonging to the stronger or to the present possessor, as being
founded on so recent an usurpation?
Commodus mounted the throne after a pretty long succession of excellent emperors,
who had acquired their title, not by birth, or public election, but by the fictitious rite
of adoption. That bloody debauchee being murdered by a conspiracy suddenly formed
between his wench and her gallant, who happened at that time to be Prætorian
Præfect; these immediately deliberated about choosing a master to human kind, to
speak in the style of those ages; and they cast their eyes on Pertinax. Before the
tyrant’s death was known, the Præfect went secretly to that senator, who, on the
appearance of the soldiers, imagined that his execution had been ordered by
Commodus. He was immediately saluted emperor by the officer and his attendants;
chearfully proclaimed by the populace; unwillingly submitted to by the guards;
formally recognized by the senate; and passively received by the provinces and armies
of the empire.
The discontent of the Prætorian bands broke out in a sudden sedition, which
occasioned the murder of that excellent prince: And the world being now without a
master and without government, the guards thought proper to set the empire formally
to sale. Julian, the purchaser, was proclaimed by the soldiers, recognized by the
senate, and submitted to by the people; and must also have been submitted to by the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 262 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
provinces, had not the envy of the legions begotten opposition and resistance.
Pescennius Niger in Syria elected himself emperor, gained the tumultuary consent of
his army, and was attended with the secret good-will of the senate and people of
Rome. Albinus in Britain found an equal right to set up his claim; but Severus, who
governed Pannonia, prevailed in the end above both of them. That able politician and
warrior, finding his own birth and dignity too much inferior to the imperial crown,
professed, at first, an intention only of revenging the death of Pertinax. He marched as
general into Italy; defeated Julian; and without our being able to fix any precise
commencement even of the soldiers’ consent, he was from necessity acknowledged
emperor by the senate and people; and fully established in his violent authority by
subduing Niger and Albinus.16
Inter hæc Gordianus Cæsar (says Capitolinus, speaking of another period) sublatus a
militibus. Imperator est appellatus, quia non erat alius in præsenti.17 It is to be
remarked, that Gordian was a boy of fourteen years of age.
Frequent instances of a like nature occur in the history of the emperors; in that of
Alexander’s successors; and of many other countries: Nor can any thing be more
unhappy than a despotic government of this kind; where the succession is disjointed
and irregular, and must be determined, on every vacancy, by force or election. In a
free government, the matter is often unavoidable, and is also much less dangerous.
The interests of liberty may there frequently lead the people, in their own defence, to
alter the succession of the crown. And the constitution, being compounded of parts,
may still maintain a sufficient stability, by resting on the aristocratical or democratical
members, though the monarchical be altered, from time to time, in order to
accommodate it to the former.
In an absolute government, when there is no legal prince, who has a title to the throne,
it may safely be determined to belong to the first occupant. Instances of this kind are
but too frequent, especially in the eastern monarchies. j When any race of princes
expires, the will or destination of the last sovereign will be regarded as a title. Thus
the edict of Lewis the XIVth, who called the bastard princes to the succession in case
of the failure of all the legitimate princes, would, in such an event, have some
authority.18k Thus the will of Charles the Second disposed of the whole Spanish
monarchy. The cession of the ancient proprietor, especially when joined to conquest,
is likewise deemed a good title. The general obligation, which binds us to
government, is the interest and necessities of society; and this obligation is very
strong. The determination of it to this or that particular prince or form of government
is frequently more uncertain and dubious. Present possession has considerable
authority in these cases, and greater than in private property; because of the disorders
which attend all revolutions and changes of government.l
We shall only observe, before we conclude, that, though an appeal to general opinion
may justly, in the speculative sciences of metaphysics, natural philosophy, or
astronomy, be deemed unfair and inconclusive, yet in all questions with regard to
morals, as well as criticism, there is really no other standard, by which any
controversy can ever be decided. And nothing is a clearer proof, that a theory of this
kind is erroneous, than to find, that it leads to paradoxes, repugnant to the common
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 263 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
sentiments of mankind, and to the practice and opinion of all nations and all ages. The
doctrine, which founds all lawful government on an original contract, or consent of
the people, is plainly of this kind; nor has the most noted of its partizans, in
prosecution of it, scrupled to affirm, that absolute monarchy is inconsistent with civil
society, and so can be no form of civil government at all;19 and that the supreme
power in a state cannot take from any man, by taxes and impositions, any part of his
property, without his own consent or that of his representatives.20 What authority any
moral reasoning can have, which leads into opinions so wide of the general practice of
mankind, in every place but this single kingdom, it is easy to determine.m
The only passage I meet with in antiquity, where the obligation of obedience to
government is ascribed to a promise, is in Plato’sCrito: where Socrates refuses to
escape from prison, because he had tacitly promised to obey the laws.21 Thus he
builds a tory consequence of passive obedience, on a whig foundation of the original
contract.
New discoveries are not to be expected in these matters. If scarce any man, till very
lately, ever imagined that government was founded on compact, it is certain, that it
cannot, in general, have any such foundation.
The crime of rebellion among the ancients was commonly expressed by the terms
νεωτερίζειν, novas res moliri.22
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 264 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XIII
OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE
In the former essay, we endeavoured to refute the speculative systems of politics
advanced in this nation; as well the religious system of the one party, as the
philosophical of the other. We come now to examine the practical consequences,
deduced by each party, with regard to the measures of submission due to sovereigns.1
As the obligation to justice is founded entirely on the interests of society, which
require mutual abstinence from property, in order to preserve peace among mankind;
it is evident, that, when the execution of justice would be attended with very
pernicious consequences, that virtue must be suspended, and give place to public
utility, in such extraordinary and such pressing emergencies. The maxim, fiat Justitia
& ruat Cœlum, let justice be performed, though the universe be destroyed, is
apparently false, and by sacrificing the end to the means, shews a preposterous idea of
the subordination of duties. What governor of a town makes any scruple of burning
the suburbs, when they facilitate the approaches of the enemy? Or what general
abstains from plundering a neutral country, when the necessities of war require it, and
he cannot otherwise subsist his army? The case is the same with the duty of
allegiance; and common sense teaches us, that, as government binds us to obedience
only on account of its tendency to public utility, that duty must always, in
extraordinary cases, when public ruin would evidently attend obedience, yield to the
primary and original obligation. Salus populi suprema Lex, the safety of the people is
the supreme law.2 This maxim is agreeable to the sentiments of mankind in all ages:
Nor is any one, when he reads of the insurrections against Neroa or Philip the Second,
so infatuated with party-systems, as not to wish success to the enterprize, and praise
the undertakers. Even our high monarchical party, in spite of their sublime theory, are
forced, in such cases, to judge, and feel, and approve, in conformity to the rest of
mankind.
Resistance, therefore, being admitted in extraordinary emergencies, the question can
only be among good reasoners, with regard to the degree of necessity, which can
justify resistance, and render it lawful or commendable. And here I must confess, that
I shall always incline to their side, who draw the bond of allegiance very close, and
consider an infringement of it, as the last refuge in desperate cases, when the public is
in the highest danger, from violence and tyranny. For besides the mischiefs of a civil
war, which commonly attends insurrection; it is certain, that, where a disposition to
rebellion appears among any people, it is one chief cause of tyranny in the rulers, and
forces them into many violent measures which they never would have embraced, had
every one been inclined to submission and obedience. Thus the tyrannicide or
assassination, approved of by ancient maxims, instead of keeping tyrants and usurpers
in awe, made them ten times more fierce and unrelenting; and is now justly, upon that
account, abolished by the laws of nations, and universally condemned as a base and
treacherous method of bringing to justice these disturbers of society.3
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 265 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Besides we must consider, that, as obedience is our duty in the common course of
things, it ought chiefly to be inculcated; nor can any thing be more preposterous than
an anxious care and solicitude in stating all the cases, in which resistance may be
allowed. In like manner, though a philosopher reasonably acknowledges, in the course
of an argument, that the rules of justice may be dispensed with in cases of urgent
necessity; what should we think of a preacher or casuist, who should make it his chief
study to find out such cases, and enforce them with all the vehemence of argument
and eloquence? Would he not be better employed in inculcating the general doctrine,
than in displaying the particular exceptions, which we are, perhaps, but too much
inclined, of ourselves, to embrace and to extend?
There are, however, two reasons, which may be pleaded in defence of that party
among us, who have, with so much industry, propagated the maxims of resistance;
maxims, which, it must be confessed, are, in general, so pernicious, and so destructive
of civil society. The first is, that their antagonists carrying the doctrine of obedience to
such an extravagant height, as not only never to mention the exceptions in
extraordinary cases (which might, perhaps, be excusable) but even positively to
exclude them; it became necessary to insist on these exceptions, and defend the rights
of injured truth and liberty. The second, and, perhaps, better reason, is founded on the
nature of the British constitution and form of government.
It is almost peculiar to our constitution to establish a first magistrate with such high
pre-eminence and dignity, that, though limited by the laws, he is, in a manner, so far
as regards his own person, above the laws, and can neither be questioned nor punished
for any injury or wrong, which may be committed by him. His ministers alone, or
those who act by his commission, are obnoxious to justice; and while the prince is
thus allured, by the prospect of personal safety, to give the laws their free course, an
equal security is, in effect, obtained by the punishment of lesser offenders, and at the
same time a civil war is avoided, which would be the infallible consequence, were an
attack, at every turn, made directly upon the sovereign. But though the constitution
pays this salutary compliment to the prince, it can never reasonably be understood, by
that maxim, to have determined its own destruction, or to have established a tame
submission, where he protects his ministers, perseveres in injustice, and usurps the
whole power of the commonwealth. This case, indeed, is never expressly put by the
laws; because it is impossible for them, in their ordinary course, to provide a remedy
for it, or establish any magistrate, with superior authority, to chastise the exorbitancies
of the prince. But as a right without a remedy would be an absurdity; the remedy in
this case, is the extraordinary one of resistance, when affairs come to that extremity,
that the constitution can be defended by it alone. Resistance therefore must, of course,
become more frequent in the British government, than in others, which are simpler,
and consist of fewer parts and movements. Where the king is an absolute sovereign,
he has little temptation to commit such enormous tyranny as may justly provoke
rebellion: But where he is limited, his imprudent ambition, without any great vices,
may run him into that perilous situation. This is frequently supposed to have been the
case with Charles the First; and if we may now speak truth, after animosities are
ceased, this was also the case with James the Second. These were harmless, if not, in
their private character, good men; but mistaking the nature of our constitution, and
engrossing the whole legislative power, it became necessary to oppose them with
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 266 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
some vehemence; and even to deprive the latter formally of that authority, which he
had used with such imprudence and indiscretion.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 267 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XIV
OF THE COALITION OF PARTIES
To abolish all distinctions of party may not be practicable, perhaps not desirable, in a
free government. The only dangerous parties are such as entertain opposite views with
regard to the essentials of government, the succession of the crown, or the more
considerable privileges belonging to the several members of the constitution; where
there is no room for any compromise or accommodation, and where the controversy
may appear so momentous as to justify even an opposition by arms to the pretensions
of antagonists. Of this nature was the animosity, continued for above a century past,
between the parties in England; an animosity which broke out sometimes into civil
war, which occasioned violent revolutions, and which continually endangered the
peace and tranquillity of the nation. But as there have appeared of late the strongest
symptoms of an universal desire to abolish these party distinctions; this tendency to a
coalition affords the most agreeable prospect of future happiness, and ought to be
carefully cherished and promoted by every lover of his country.
There is not a more effectual method of promoting so good an end, than to prevent all
unreasonable insult and triumph of the one party over the other, to encourage
moderate opinions, to find the proper medium in all disputes, to persuade each that its
antagonist may possibly be sometimes in the right, and to keep a balance in the praise
and blame, which we bestow on either side. The two former Essays, concerning the
original contract and passive obedience, are calculated for this purpose with regard to
the philosophicala and practical controversies between the parties, and tend to show
that neither side are in these respects so fully supported by reason as they endeavour
to flatter themselves. We shall proceed to exercise the same moderation with regard to
the historical disputes between the parties, by proving that each of them was justified
by plausible topics; that there were on both sides wise men, who meant well to their
country; and that the past animosity between the factions had no better foundation
than narrow prejudice or interested passion.
The popular party, who afterwards acquired the name of whigs, might justify, by very
specious arguments, that opposition to the crown, from which our present free
constitution is derived. Though obliged to acknowledge, that precedents in favour of
prerogative had uniformly taken place during many reigns before Charles the First,
they thought, that there was no reason for submitting any longer to so dangerous an
authority. Such might have been their reasoning: As the rights of mankind are for ever
to be deemed sacred, no prescription of tyranny or arbitrary power can have authority
sufficient to abolish them. Liberty is a blessing so inestimable, that, wherever there
appears any probability of recovering it, a nation may willingly run many hazards,
and ought not even to repine° at the greatest effusion of blood or dissipation of
treasure. All human institutions, and none more than government, are in continual
fluctuation. Kings are sure to embrace every opportunity of extending their
prerogatives: And if favourable incidents be not also laid hold of for extending and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 268 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
securing the privileges of the people, an universal despotism must for ever prevail
amongst mankind. The example of all the neighbouring nations proves, that it is no
longer safe to entrust with the crown the same high prerogatives, which had formerly
been exercised during rude and simple ages. And though the example of many late
reigns may be pleaded in favour of a power in the prince somewhat arbitrary, more
remote reigns afford instances of stricter limitations imposed on the crown; and those
pretensions of the parliament, now branded with the title of innovations, are only a
recovery of the just rights of the people.
These views, far from being odious, are surely large, and generous, and noble: To
their prevalence and success the kingdom owes its liberty; perhaps its learning, its
industry, commerce, and naval power: By them chiefly the English name is
distinguished among the society of nations, and aspires to a rivalship with that of the
freest and most illustrious commonwealths of antiquity. But as all these mighty
consequences could not reasonably be foreseen at the time when the contest began,
the royalists of that age wanted not specious arguments on their side, by which they
could justify their defence of the then established prerogatives of the prince. We shall
state the question, as it might have appeared to them at the assembling of that
parliament, which, by its violent encroachments on the crown, began the civil wars.
The only rule of government, they might have said, known and acknowledged among
men, is use and practice: Reason is so uncertain a guide that it will always be exposed
to doubt and controversy: Could it ever render itself prevalent over the people, men
had always retained it as their sole rule of conduct: They had still continued in the
primitive, unconnected, state of nature, without submitting to political government,
whose sole basis is, not pure reason, but authority and precedent. Dissolve these ties,
you break all the bonds of civil society, and leave every man at liberty to consult his
private interest, by those expedients, which his appetite, disguised under the
appearance of reason, shall dictate to him. The spirit of innovation is in itself
pernicious, however favourable its particular object may sometimes appear: A truth so
obvious, that the popular party themselves are sensible of it; and therefore cover their
encroachments on the crown by the plausible pretence of their recovering the ancient
liberties of the people.
But the present prerogatives of the crown, allowing all the suppositions of that party,
have been incontestably established ever since the accession of the House of Tudor; a
period, which, as it now comprehends a hundred and sixty years, may be allowed
sufficient to give stability to any constitution. Would it not have appeared ridiculous,
in the reign of the Emperor Adrian, to have talked of the republican constitution as the
rule of government; or to have supposed, that the former rights of the senate, and
consuls, and tribunes were still subsisting?1
But the present claims of the English monarchs are much more favourable than those
of the Roman emperors during that age. The authority of Augustus was a plain
usurpation, grounded only on military violence, and forms such an epoch in the
Roman history, as is obvious to every reader. But if Henry VII. really, as some
pretend, enlarged the power of the crown, it was only by insensible acquisitions,
which escaped the apprehension of the people, and have scarcely been remarked even
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 269 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
by historians and politicians. The new government, if it deserve the epithet, is an
imperceptible transition from the former; is entirely engrafted on it; derives its title
fully from that root; and is to be considered only as one of those gradual revolutions,
to which human affairs, in every nation, will be for ever subject.
The House of Tudor, and after them that of Stuart, exercised no prerogatives, but what
had been claimed and exercised by the Plantagenets.2 Not a single branch of their
authority can be said to be an innovation. The only difference is, that, perhaps, former
kings exerted these powers only by intervals, and were not able, by reason of the
opposition of their barons, to render them so steady a rule of administration.b But the
sole inference from this fact is, that those ancient times were more turbulent and
seditious; and that royal authority, the constitution, and the laws have happily of late
gained the ascendant.
Under what pretence can the popular party now speak of recovering the ancient
constitution? The former controul over the kings was not placed in the commons, but
in the barons: The people had no authority, and even little or no liberty; till the crown,
by suppressing these factious tyrants, enforced the execution of the laws, and obliged
all the subjects equally to respect each others rights, privileges, and properties. If we
must return to the ancient barbarous and c feudal constitution; let those gentlemen,
who now behave themselves with so much insolence to their sovereign, set the first
example. Let them make court to be admitted as retainers to a neighbouring baron;
and by submitting to slavery under him, acquire some protection to themselves;
together with the power of exercising rapine and oppression over their inferior slaves
and villains. This was the condition of the commons among their remote ancestors.
But how far back must we go, in having recourse to ancient constitutions and
governments? There was a constitution still more ancient than that to which these
innovators affect so much to appeal. During that period there was no magna charta:
The barons themselves possessed few regular, stated privileges: And the house of
commons probably had not an existence.3
It is ridiculous to hear the commons, while they are assuming, by usurpation, the
whole power of government, talk of reviving ancient institutions. Is it not known, that,
though representatives received wages from their constituents; to be a member of the
lower house was always considered as a burden, and an exemption from it as a
privilege? Will they persuade us, that power, which, of all human acquisitions, is the
most coveted, and in comparison of which even reputation and pleasure and riches are
slighted, could ever be regarded as a burden by any man?
The property, acquired of late by the commons, it is said, entitles them to more power
than their ancestors enjoyed. But to what is this encrease of their property owing, but
to an encrease of their liberty and their security? Let them therefore acknowledge, that
their ancestors, while the crown was restrained by the seditious barons, really enjoyed
less liberty than they themselves have attained, after the sovereign acquired the
ascendant: And let them enjoy that liberty with moderation; and not forfeit it by new
exorbitant claims, and by rendering it a pretence for endless innovations.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 270 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The true rule of government is the present established practice of the age. That has
most authority, because it is recent: It is also best known, for the same reason. Who
has assured those tribunes, that the Plantagenets did not exercise as high acts of
authority as the Tudors? Historians, they say, do not mention them. But historians are
also silent with regard to the chief exertions of prerogative by the Tudors. Where any
power or prerogative is fully and undoubtedly established, the exercise of it passes for
a thing of course, and readily escapes the notice of history and annals. Had we no
other monuments of Elizabeth’s reign, than what are preserved even by Camden,4 the
most copious, judicious, and exact of our historians, we should be entirely ignorant of
the most important maxims of her government.
Was not the present monarchical government, in its full extent, authorized by lawyers,
recommended by divines, acknowledged by politicians, acquiesced in, nay
passionately cherished, by the people in general; and all this during a period of at least
a hundred and sixty years, and till of late, without the smallest murmur or
controversy? This general consent surely, during so long a time, must be sufficient to
render a constitution legal and valid. If the origin of all power be derived, as is
pretended, from the people; here is their consent in the fullest and most ample terms
that can be desired or imagined.
But the people must not pretend, because they can, by their consent, lay the
foundations of government, that therefore they are to be permitted, at their pleasure, to
overthrow and subvert them. There is no end of these seditious and arrogant claims.
The power of the crown is now openly struck at: The nobility are also in visible peril:
The gentry will soon follow: The popular leaders, who will then assume the name of
gentry, will next be exposed to danger: And the people themselves, having become
incapable of civil government, and lying under the restraint of no authority, must, for
the sake of peace, admit, instead of their legal and mild monarchs, a succession of
military and despotic tyrants.
These consequences are the more to be dreaded, as the present fury of the people,
though glossed over by pretensions to civil liberty, is in reality incited by the
fanaticism of religion; a principle the most blind, headstrong, and ungovernable, by
which human nature can possibly be actuated. Popular rage is dreadful, from whatever
motive derived: But must be attended with the most pernicious consequences, when it
arises from a principle, which disclaims all controul by human law, reason, or
authority.
These are the arguments, which each party may make use of to justify the conduct of
their predecessors, during that great crisis.5 The event,° if that can be admitted as a
reason, has shown, that the arguments of the popular party were better founded; but
perhaps, according to the established maxims of lawyers and politicians, the views of
the royalists ought, before-hand, to have appeared more solid, more safe, and more
legal. But this is certain, that the greater moderation we now employ in representing
past events; the nearer shall we be to produce a full coalition of the parties, and an
entire acquiescence in our present establishment. Moderation is of advantage to every
establishment: Nothing but zeal can overturn a settled power: And an over-active zeal
in friends is apt to beget a like spirit in antagonists. The transition from a moderate
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 271 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
opposition against an establishment, to an entire acquiescence in it, is easy and
insensible.
There are many invincible arguments, which should induce the malcontent party to
acquiesce entirely in the present settlement of the constitution. They now find, that the
spirit of civil liberty, though at first connected with religious fanaticism, could purge
itself from that pollution, and appear under a more genuine and engaging aspect; a
friend to toleration, and an encourager of all the enlarged and generous sentiments
that do honour to human nature. They may observe, that the popular claims could stop
at a proper period; and after retrenching the high claims of prerogative, could still
maintain a due respect to monarchy, to nobility, and to all ancient institutions. Above
all, they must be sensible, that the very principle, which made the strength of their
party, and from which it derived its chief authority, has now deserted them, and gone
over to their antagonists. The plan of liberty is settled; its happy effects are proved by
experience; a long tract of time has given it stability; and whoever would attempt to
overturn it, and to recall the past government or abdicated family, would, besides
other more criminal imputations, be exposed, in their turn, to the reproach of faction
and innovation. While they peruse the history of past events, they ought to reflect,
both that those rights of the crown are long since annihilated, and that the tyranny,
and violence, and oppression, to which they often gave rise, are ills, from which the
established liberty of the constitution has now at last happily protected the people.
These reflections will prove a better security to our freedom and privileges, than to
deny, contrary to the clearest evidence of facts, that such regal powers ever had an
existence. There is not a more effectual method of betraying a cause, than to lay the
stress of the argument on a wrong place, and by disputing an untenable post, enure the
adversaries to success and victory.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 272 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XV
OF THE PROTESTANT SUCCESSION
I suppose, that a member of parliament, in the reign of King William or Queen Anne,
while the establishment of the Protestant Succession was yet uncertain, were
deliberating concerning the party he would chuse in that important question, and
weighing, with impartiality, the advantages and disadvantages on each side. I believe
the following particulars would have entered into his consideration.1
He would easily perceive the great advantage resulting from the restoration of the
Stuart family; by which we should preserve the succession clear and undisputed, free
from a pretender, with such a specious title as that of blood, which, with the
multitude, is always the claim, the strongest and most easily comprehended. It is in
vain to say, as many have done, that the question with regard to governors,
independent of government, is frivolous, and little worth disputing, much less fighting
about. The generality of mankind never will enter into these sentiments; and it is
much happier, I believe, for society, that they do not, but rather continue in their
natural prepossessions.° How could stability be preserved in any monarchical
government, (which, though, perhaps, not the best, is, and always has been, the most
common of any) unless men had so passionate a regard for the true heir of their royal
family; and even though he be weak in understanding, or infirm in years, gave him so
sensible a preference above persons the most accomplished in shining talents, or
celebrated for great atchievements? Would not every popular leader put in his claim at
every vacancy, or even without any vacancy; and the kingdom become the theatre of
perpetual wars and convulsions? The condition of the Roman empire, surely, was not,
in this respect, much to be envied; nor is that of the Eastern nations, who pay little
regard to the titles of their sovereign, but sacrifice them, every day, to the caprice or
momentary humour of the populace or soldiery. It is but a foolish wisdom, which is so
carefully displayed, in undervaluing princes, and placing them on a level with the
meanest of mankind. To be sure, an anatomist finds no more in the greatest monarch
than in the lowest peasant or day-labourer; and a moralist may, perhaps, frequently
find less. But what do all these reflections tend to? We, all of us, still retain these
prejudices in favour of birth and family; and neither in our serious occupations, nor
most careless amusements, can we ever get entirely rid of them. A tragedy, that
should represent the adventures of sailors, or porters, or even of private gentlemen,
would presently disgust us; but one that introduces kings and princes, acquires in our
eyes an air of importance and dignity. Or should a man be able, by his superior
wisdom, to get entirely above such prepossessions, he would soon, by means of the
same wisdom, again bring himself down to them, for the sake of society, whose
welfare he would perceive to be intimately connected with them. Far from
endeavouring to undeceive the people in this particular, he would cherish such
sentiments of reverence to their princes; as requisite to preserve a due subordination
in society. And though the lives of twenty thousand men be often sacrificed to
maintain a king in possession of his throne, or preserve the right of succession
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 273 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
undisturbed, he entertains no indignation at the loss, on pretence that every individual
of these was, perhaps, in himself, as valuable as the prince he served. He considers the
consequences of violating the hereditary right of kings: Consequences, which may be
felt for many centuries; while the loss of several thousand men brings so little
prejudice to a large kingdom, that it may not be perceived a few years after.
The advantages of the Hanover succession are of an opposite nature, and arise from
this very circumstance, that it violates hereditary right; and places on the throne a
prince, to whom birth gave no title to that dignity. It is evident, from the history of
this island, that the privileges of the people have, during near two centuries, been
continually upon the encrease, by the division of the church-lands, by the alienations
of the barons’ estates, by the progress of trade, and above all, by the happiness of our
situation, which, for a long time, gave us sufficient security, without any standing
army or military establishment. On the contrary, public liberty has, almost in every
other nation of Europe, been, during the same period, extremely upon the decline;
while the people were disgusted at the hardships of the old a feudal militia, and rather
chose to entrust their prince with mercenary armies, which he easily turned against
themselves. It was nothing extraordinary, therefore, that some of our British
sovereigns mistook the nature of the constitution, at least, the genius of the people;
and as they embraced all the favourable precedents left them by their ancestors, they
overlooked all those which were contrary, and which supposed a limitation in our
government. They were encouraged in this mistake, by the example of all the
neighbouring princes, who bearing the same title or appellation, and being adorned
with the same ensigns of authority, naturally led them to claim the same powers and
prerogatives. b It appears from the speeches, and proclamations of James I. and the
whole train of that prince’s actions, as well as his son’s, that he regarded the English
government as a simple monarchy, and never imagined that any considerable part of
his subjects entertained a contrary idea. This opinion made those monarchs discover
their pretensions, without preparing any force to support them; and even without
reserve or disguise, which are always employed by those, who enter upon any new
project, or endeavour to innovate in any government. The flattery of courtiers farther
c confirmed their prejudices; and above all, that of the clergy, who from several
passages of scripture, and these wrested° too, had erected a regular and avowed
system of arbitrary power. The only method of destroying, at once, all these high
claims and pretensions, was to depart from the true hereditary line, and choose a
prince, who, being plainly a creature of the public, and receiving the crown on
conditions, expressed and avowed, found his authority established on the same
bottom° with the privileges of the people. By electing him in the royal line, we cut off
all hopes of ambitious subjects, who might, in future emergencies, disturb the
government by their cabals and pretensions: By rendering the crown hereditary in his
family, we avoided all the inconveniencies of elective monarchy: And by excluding
the lineal heir, we secured all our constitutional limitations, and rendered our
government uniform and of a piece.° The people cherish monarchy, because protected
by it: The monarch favours liberty, because created by it. And thus every advantage is
obtained by the new establishment, as far as human skill and wisdom can extend
itself.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 274 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
These are the separate advantages of fixing the succession, either in the house of
Stuart, or in that of Hanover. There are also disadvantages in each establishment,
which an impartial patriot would ponder and examine, in order to form a just
judgment upon the whole.
The disadvantages of the protestant succession consist in the foreign dominions,
which are possessed by the princes of the Hanover line, and which, it might be
supposed, would engage us in the intrigues and wars of the continent, and lose us, in
some measure, the inestimable advantage we possess, of being surrounded and
guarded by the sea, which we command. The disadvantages of recalling the abdicated
family consist chiefly in their religion, which is more prejudicial to society than that
established amongst us, is contrary to it, and affords no toleration, or peace, or
security to any other communion.
It appears to me, that these advantages and disadvantages are allowed on both sides;
at least, by every one who is at all susceptible of argument or reasoning. No subject,
however loyal, pretends to deny, that the disputed title and foreign dominions of the
present royal family are a loss. Nor is there any partizan of the Stuarts, but will
confess, that the claim of hereditary, indefeasible right, and the Roman Catholic
religion, are also disadvantages in that family. It belongs, therefore, to a philosopher
alone, who is of neither party, to put all the circumstances in the scale, and assign to
each of them its proper poise° and influence. Such a one will readily, at first,
acknowledge that all political questions are infinitely complicated, and that there
scarcely ever occurs, in any deliberation, a choice, which is either purely good, or
purely ill. Consequences, mixed and varied, may be foreseen to flow from every
measure: And many consequences, unforeseen, do always, in fact, result from every
one. Hesitation, and reserve, and suspence, are, therefore, the only sentiments he
brings to this essay° or trial. Or if he indulges any passion, it is that of derision against
the ignorant multitude, who are always clamorous and dogmatical, even in the nicest
questions, of which, from want of temper, perhaps still more than of understanding,
they are altogether unfit judges.
But to say something more determinate on this head, the following reflections will, I
hope, show the temper, if not the understanding of a philosopher.
Were we to judge merely by first appearances, and by past experience, we must allow
that the advantages of a parliamentary title in the house of Hanover are greater than
those of an undisputed hereditary title in the house of Stuart; and that our fathers acted
wisely in preferring the former to the latter. So long as the house of Stuart ruled in
Great Britain, which, with some interruption, was above eighty years, the government
was kept in a continual fever, by the contention between the privileges of the people
and the prerogatives of the crown. If arms were dropped, the noise of disputes
continued: Or if these were silenced, jealousy still corroded the heart, and threw the
nation into an unnatural ferment and disorder. And while we were thus occupied in
domestic disputes, a foreign power, dangerous to public liberty, erected itself in
Europe, without any opposition from us, and even sometimes with our assistance.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 275 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
But during these last sixty years, when a parliamentary establishment has taken place;
whatever factions may have prevailed either among the people or in public
assemblies, the whole force of our constitution has always fallen to one side, and an
uninterrupted harmony has been preserved between our princes and our parliaments.
Public liberty, with internal peace and order, has flourished almost without
interruption: Trade and manufactures, and agriculture, have encreased: The arts, and
sciences, and philosophy, have been cultivated. Even religious parties have been
necessitated to lay aside their mutual rancour: And the glory of the nation has spread
itself all over Europe;d derived equally from our progress in the arts of peace, and
from valour and success in war. So long and so glorious a period no nation almost can
boast of: Nor is there another instance in the whole history of mankind, that so many
millions of people have, during such a space of time, been held together, in a manner
so free, so rational, and so suitable to the dignity of human nature.
But though this recent experience seems clearly to decide in favour of the present
establishment, there are some circumstances to be thrown into the other scale; and it is
dangerous to regulate our judgment by one event or example.
We have had two rebellions during the flourishing period above mentioned, besides
plots and conspiracies without number. And if none of these have produced any very
fatal event, we may ascribe our escape chiefly to the narrow genius of those princes
who disputed our establishment; and we may esteem ourselves so far fortunate. But
the claims of the banished family, I fear, are not yet antiquated;° and who can foretel,
that their future attempts will produce no greater disorder?
The disputes between privilege and prerogative may easily be composed by laws, and
votes, and conferences, and concessions; where there is tolerable temper or prudence
on both sides, or on either side. Among contending titles, the question can only be
determined by the sword, and by devastation, and by civil war.
A prince, who fills the throne with a disputed title, dares not arm his subjects; the only
method of securing a people fully, both against domestic oppression and foreign
conquest.
Notwithstanding our riches and renown, what a critical escape did we make, by the
late peace, from dangers, which were owing not so much to bad conduct and ill
success in war, as to the pernicious practice of mortgaging our finances, and the still
more pernicious maxim of never paying off our incumbrances? Such fatal measures
would not probably have been embraced, had it not been to secure a precarious
establishment.e
But to convince us, that an hereditary title is to be embraced rather than a
parliamentary one, which is not supported by any other views or motives; a man
needs only transport himself back to the æra of the restoration, and suppose, that he
had had a seat in that parliament which recalled the royal family, and put a period to
the greatest disorders that ever arose from the opposite pretensions of prince and
people. What would have been thought of one, that had proposed, at that time, to set
aside Charles II. and settle the crown on the Duke of York, or Gloucester, merely in
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 276 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
order to exclude all high claims, like those of their father and grandfather? Would not
such a one have been regarded as an extravagant projector, who loved dangerous
remedies, and could tamper and play with a government and national constitution, like
a quack with a sickly patient?f
In reality, the reason assigned by the nation for excluding the race of Stuart, and so
many other branches of the royal family, is not on account of their hereditary title (a
reason, which would, to vulgar apprehensions, have appeared altogether absurd), but
on account of their religion. Which leads us to compare the disadvantages above
mentioned in each establishment.
I confess, that, considering the matter in general, it were much to be wished, that our
prince had no foreign dominions, and could confine all his attention to the
government of this island. For not to mention some real inconveniencies that may
result from territories on the continent, they afford such a handle for calumny and
defamation, as is greedily seized by the people, always disposed to think ill of their
superiors. It must, however, be acknowledged, that Hanover, is, perhaps, the spot of
ground in Europe the least inconvenient for a King of England. It lies in the heart of
Germany, at a distance from the great powers, which are our natural rivals: It is
protected by the laws of the empire, as well as by the arms of its own sovereign: And
it serves only to connect us more closely with the house of Austria, our natural ally.g
The religious persuasion of the house of Stuart is an inconvenience of a much deeper
dye, and would threaten us with much more dismal consequences. The Roman
Catholic religion, with its train of priests and friers, is more expensive than ours: Even
though unaccompanied with its natural attendants of inquisitors, and stakes, and
gibbets, it is less tolerating: And not content with dividing the sacerdotal° from the
regal office (which must be prejudicial to any state), it bestows the former on a
foreigner, who has always a separate interest from that of the public, and may often
have an opposite one.
But were this religion ever so advantageous to society, it is contrary to that which is
established among us, and which is likely to keep possession, for a long time, of the
minds of the people. And though it is much to be hoped, that the progress of reason
will, by degrees, abate the h acrimony of opposite religions all over Europe; yet the
spirit of moderation has, as yet, made too slow advances to be entirely trusted.i
Thus, upon the whole, the advantages of the settlement in the family of Stuart, which
frees us from a disputed title, seem to bear some proportion with those of the
settlement in the family of Hanover, which frees us from the claims of prerogative:
But at the same time, its disadvantages, by placing on the throne a Roman Catholic,
are greater than those of the other establishment, in settling the crown on a foreign
prince. What party an impartial patriot, in the reign of K. William or Q. Anne, would
have chosen amidst these opposite views, may, perhaps, to some appear hard to
determine.j
But the settlement in the house of Hanover has actually taken place. The princes of
that family, without intrigue, without cabal, without solicitation on their part, have
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 277 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
been called to mount our throne, by the united voice of the whole legislative body.
They have, since their accession, displayed, in all their actions, the utmost mildness,
equity, and regard to the laws and constitution. Our own ministers, our own
parliaments, ourselves have governed us; and if aught ill has befallen us, we can only
blame fortune or ourselves. What a reproach must we become among nations, if,
disgusted with a settlement so deliberately made, and whose conditions have been so
religiously observed, we should throw every thing again into confusion; and by our
levity and rebellious disposition, prove ourselves totally unfit for any state but that of
absolute slavery and subjection?
The greatest inconvenience, attending a disputed title, is, that it brings us in danger of
civil wars and rebellions. What wise man, to avoid this inconvenience, would run
directly into a civil war and rebellion? Not to mention, that so long possession,
secured by so many laws, must, ere this time, in the apprehension of a great part of the
nation, have begotten a title in the house of Hanover, independent of their present
possession: So that now we should not, even by a revolution, obtain the end of
avoiding a disputed title.
No revolution made by national forces, will ever be able, without some other great
necessity, to abolish our debts and incumbrances, in which the interest of so many
persons is concerned. And a revolution made by foreign forces, is a conquest: A
calamity, with which the precarious balance of power threatens us, and which our
civil dissentions are likely, above all other circumstances, to bring upon us.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 278 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY XVI
IDEA OF A PERFECT COMMONWEALTH
It is not with forms of government, as with other artificial contrivances; where an old
engine may be rejected, if we can discover another more accurate and commodious,
or where trials may safely be made, even though the success be doubtful. An
established government has an infinite advantage, by that very circumstance of its
being established; the bulk of mankind being governed by authority, not reason, and
never attributing authority to any thing that has not the recommendation of antiquity.
To tamper, therefore, in this affair, or try experiments merely upon the credit of
supposed argument and philosophy, can never be the part of a wise magistrate, who
will bear a reverence to what carries the marks of age; and though he may attempt
some improvements for the public good, yet will he adjust his innovations, as much as
possible, to the ancient fabric, and preserve entire the chief pillars and supports of the
constitution.
The mathematicians in Europe have been much divided concerning that figure of a
ship, which is the most commodious for sailing; and Huygens,1 who at last
determined the controversy, is justly thought to have obliged the learned, as well as
commercial world; though Columbus had sailed to America, and Sir Francis Drake
made the tour of the world,2 without any such discovery. As one form of government
must be allowed more perfect than another, independent of the manners and humours
of particular men; why may we not enquire what is the most perfect of all, though the
common botched and inaccurate governments seem to serve the purposes of society,
and though it be not so easy to establish a new system of government, as to build a
vessel upon a new construction? The subject is surely the most worthy curiosity of
any the wit of man can possibly devise. And who knows, if this controversy were
fixed by the universal consent of the wise and learned, but, in some future age, an
opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to practice, either by a
dissolution of some old government, or by the combination of men to form a new one,
in some distant part of the world? In all cases, it must be advantageous to know what
is most perfect in the kind, that we may be able to bring any real constitution or form
of government as near it as possible, by such gentle alterations and innovations as
may not give too great disturbance to society.
All I pretend to in the present essay is to revive this subject of speculation; and
therefore I shall deliver my sentiments in as few words as possible. A long
dissertation on that head would not, I apprehend, be very acceptable to the public,
who will be apt to regard such disquisitions both as useless and chimerical.
All plans of government, which suppose great reformation in the manners of mankind,
are plainly imaginary. Of this nature, are the Republic of Plato, and the Utopia of Sir
Thomas More.3 The Oceana is the only valuable model of a commonwealth, that has
yet been offered to the public.4
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 279 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The chief defects of the Oceana seem to be these. First, Its rotation is inconvenient,
by throwing men, of whatever abilities, by intervals, out of public employments.
Secondly, Its Agrarian is impracticable. Men will soon learn the art, which was
practised in ancient Rome, of concealing their possessions under other people’s name;
till at last, the abuse will become so common, that they will throw off even the
appearance of restraint. Thirdly, The Oceana provides not a sufficient security for
liberty, or the redress of grievances. The senate must propose, and the people consent;
by which means, the senate have not only a negative upon the people, but, what is of
much greater consequence, their negative goes before the votes of the people. Were
the King’s negative of the same nature in the English constitution, and could he
prevent any bill from coming into parliament, he would be an absolute monarch. As
his negative follows the votes of the houses, it is of little consequence: Such a
difference is there in the manner of placing the same thing. When a popular bill has
been debated in parliament, is brought to maturity, all its conveniencies and
inconveniencies, weighed and balanced; if afterwards it be presented for the royal
assent, few princes will venture to reject the unanimous desire of the people. But
could the King crush a disagreeable bill in embryo (as was the case, for some time, in
the Scottish parliament, by means of the lords of the articles5 ), the British
government would have no balance, nor would grievances ever be redressed: And it is
certain, that exorbitant power proceeds not, in any government, from new laws, so
much as from neglecting to remedy the abuses, which frequently rise from the old
ones. A government, says Machiavel, must often be brought back to its original
principles.6 It appears then, that, in the Oceana, the whole legislature may be said to
rest in the senate; which Harrington would own to be an inconvenient form of
government, especially after the Agrarian is abolished.
Here is a form of government, to which I cannot, in theory, discover any considerable
objection.
a Let Great Britain and Ireland, or any territory of equal extent, be divided into 100
counties, and each county into 100 parishes, making in all 10,000. If the country,
proposed to be erected into a commonwealth be of more narrow extent, we may
diminish the number of counties; but never bring them below thirty. If it be of greater
extent, it were better to enlarge the parishes, or throw more parishes into a county,
than encrease the number of counties.
b Let all the freeholders of twenty pounds a-year in the county, and all the
householders worth 500 pounds in the town parishes, meet annually in the parish
church, and chuse, by ballot, some freeholder of the county for their member, whom
we shall call the county representative.
Let the 100 county representatives, two days after their election, meet in the county
town, and chuse by ballot, from their own body, ten county magistrates, and one
senator. There are, therefore, in the whole commonwealth, 100 senators, 1100 county
magistrates, and 10,000 county representatives. For we shall bestow on all senators
the authority of county magistrates, and on all county magistrates the authority of
county representatives.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 280 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Let the senators meet in the capital, and be endowed with the whole executive power
of the commonwealth; the power of peace and war, of giving orders to generals,
admirals, and ambassadors, and, in short, all the prerogatives of a British King, except
his negative.
Let the county representatives meet in their particular counties, and possess the whole
legislative power of the commonwealth; the greater number of counties deciding the
question; and where these are equal, let the senate have the casting° vote.
Every new law must first be debated in the senate; and though rejected by it, if ten
senators insist and protest, it must be sent down to the counties. The senate, if they
please, may join to the copy of the law their reasons for receiving or rejecting it.
Because it would be troublesome to assemble all the county representatives for every
trivial law, that may be requisite, the senate have their choice of sending down the law
either to the county magistrates or county representatives.
The magistrates, though the law be referred to them, may, if they please, call the
representatives, and submit the affair to their determination.
Whether the law be referred by the senate to the county magistrates or representatives,
a copy of it, and of the senate’s reasons, must be sent to every representative eight
days before the day appointed for the assembling, in order to deliberate concerning it.
And though the determination be, by the senate, referred to the magistrates, if five
representatives of the county order the magistrates to assemble the whole court of
representatives, and submit the affair to their determination, they must obey.
Either the county magistrates or representatives may give, to the senator of the
county, the copy of a law to be proposed to the senate; and if five counties concur in
the same order, the law, though refused by the senate, must come either to the county
magistrates or representatives, as is contained in the order of the five counties.
Any twenty counties, by a vote either of their magistrates or representatives, may
throw any man out of all public offices for a year. Thirty counties for three years.
The senate has a power of throwing out any member or number of members of its
own body, not to be re-elected for that year. The senate cannot throw out twice in a
year the senator of the same county.
The power of the old senate continues for three weeks after the annual election of the
county representatives. Then all the new senators are shut up in a conclave, like the
cardinals; and by an intricate ballot, such as that of Venice7 or Malta, they chuse the
following magistrates; a protector, who represents the dignity of the commonwealth,
and presides in the senate; two secretaries of state; these six councils, a council of
state, a council of religion and learning, a council of trade, a council of laws, a council
of war, a council of the admiralty, each council consisting of five persons; together
with six commissioners of the treasury and a first commissioner. All these must be
senators. The senate also names all the ambassadors to foreign courts, who may either
be senators or not.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 281 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The senate may continue any or all of these, but must re-elect them every year.
The protector and two secretaries have session° and suffrage in the council of state.
The business of that council is all foreign politics. The council of state has session and
suffrage in all the other councils.
The council of religion and learning inspects the universities and clergy. That of trade
inspects every thing that may affect commerce. That of laws inspects all the abuses of
law by the inferior magistrates, and examines what improvements may be made of the
municipal law. That of war inspects the militia and its discipline, magazines, stores,
&c. and when the republic is in war, examines into the proper orders for generals. The
council of admiralty has the same power with regard to the navy, together with the
nomination of the captains and all inferior officers.
None of these councils can give orders themselves, except where they receive such
powers from the senate. In other cases, they must communicate every thing to the
senate.
When the senate is under adjournment, any of the councils may assemble it before the
day appointed for its meeting.
Besides these councils or courts, there is another called the court of competitors;
which is thus constituted. If any candidates for the office of senator have more votes
than a third of the representatives, that candidate, who has most votes, next to the
senator elected, becomes incapable for one year of all public offices, even of being a
magistrate or representative: But he takes his seat in the court of competitors. Here
then is a court which may sometimes consist of a hundred members, sometimes have
no members at all; and by that means, be for a year abolished.
The court of competitors has no power in the commonwealth. It has only the
inspection of public accounts, and the accusing of any man before the senate. If the
senate acquit him, the court of competitors may, if they please, appeal to the people,
either magistrates or representatives. Upon that appeal, the magistrates or
representatives meet on the day appointed by the court of competitors, and chuse in
each county three persons; from which number every senator is excluded. These, to
the number of 300, meet in the capital, and bring the person accused to a new trial.
The court of competitors may propose any law to the senate; and if refused, may
appeal to the people, that is, to the magistrates or representatives, who examine it in
their counties. Every senator, who is thrown out of the senate by a vote of the court,
takes his seat in the court of competitors.
The senate possesses all the judicative authority of the house of Lords, that is, all the
appeals from the inferior courts. It likewise appoints the Lord Chancellor, and all the
officers of the law.
Every county is a kind of republic within itself, and the representatives may make
bye-laws; which have no authority ’till three months after they are voted. A copy of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 282 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the law is sent to the senate, and to every other county. The senate, or any single
county, may, at any time, annul any bye-law of another county.
The representatives have all the authority of the British justices of peace in trials,
commitments, &c.
The magistrates have the appointment of all the officers of the revenue in each
county. All causes with regard to the revenue are carried ultimately by appeal before
the magistrates. They pass the accompts of all the officers; but must have their own
accompts examined and passed at the end of the year by the representatives.
The magistrates name rectors or ministers to all the parishes.
The Presbyterian government is established; and the highest ecclesiastical court is an
assembly or synod of all the presbyters of the county. The magistrates may take any
cause from this court, and determine it themselves.
The magistrates may try, and depose or suspend any presbyter.
The militia is established in imitation of that of Swisserland, which being well known,
we shall not insist upon it.8 It will only be proper to make this addition, that an army
of 20,000 men be annually drawn out by rotation, paid and encamped during six
weeks in summer; that the duty of a camp may not be altogether unknown.
The magistrates appoint all the colonels and downwards. The senate all upwards.
During war, the general appoints the colonel and downwards, and his commission is
good for a twelvemonth. But after that, it must be confirmed by the magistrates of the
county, to which the regiment belongs. The magistrates may break° any officer in the
county regiment. And the senate may do the same to any officer in the service. If the
magistrates do not think proper to confirm the general’s choice, they may appoint
another officer in the place of him they reject.
All crimes are tried within the county by the magistrates and a jury. But the senate can
stop any trial, and bring it before themselves.
Any county may indict any man before the senate for any crime.
The protector, the two secretaries, the council of state, with any five or more that the
senate appoints, are possessed, on extraordinary emergencies, of dictatorial power for
six months.
The protector may pardon any person condemned by the inferior courts.
In time of war, no officer of the army that is in the field can have any civil office in
the commonwealth.
The capital, which we shall call London, may be allowed four members in the senate.
It may therefore be divided into four counties. The representatives of each of these
chuse one senator, and ten magistrates. There are therefore in the city four senators,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 283 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
forty-four magistrates, and four hundred representatives. The magistrates have the
same authority as in the counties. The representatives also have the same authority;
but they never meet in one general court: They give their votes in their particular
county, or division of hundreds.
When they enact any bye-law, the greater number of counties or divisions determines
the matter. And where these are equal, the magistrates have the casting vote.
The magistrates chuse the mayor, sheriff, recorder, and other officers of the city.
In the commonwealth, no representative, magistrate, or senator, as such, has any
salary. The protector, secretaries, councils, and ambassadors, have salaries.
The first year in every century is set apart for correcting all inequalities, which time
may have produced in the representative. This must be done by the legislature.
The following political aphorisms° may explain the reason of these orders.
The lower sort of people and small proprietors are good judges enough of one not
very distant from them in rank or habitation; and therefore, in their parochial
meetings, will probably chuse the best, or nearly the best representative: But they are
wholly unfit for county-meetings, and for electing into the higher offices of the
republic. Their ignorance gives the grandees an opportunity of deceiving them.
Ten thousand, even though they were not annually elected, are a basis large enough
for any free government. It is true, the nobles in Poland are more than 10,000, and yet
these oppress the people. But as power always continues there in the same persons
and families, this makes them, in a manner, a different nation from the people.
Besides the nobles are there united under a few heads of families.
All free governments must consist of two councils, a lesser and greater; or, in other
words, of a senate and people. The people, as Harrington observes, would want
wisdom, without the senate: The senate, without the people, would want honesty.
A large assembly of 1000, for instance, to represent the people, if allowed to debate,
would fall into disorder. If not allowed to debate, the senate has a negative upon them,
and the worst kind of negative, that before resolution.
Here therefore is an inconvenience, which no government has yet fully remedied, but
which is the easiest to be remedied in the world. If the people debate, all is confusion:
If they do not debate, they can only resolve; and then the senate carves for them.
Divide the people into many separate bodies; and then they may debate with safety,
and every inconvenience seems to be prevented.
Cardinal de Retz says, that all numerous assemblies, however composed, are mere
mob, and swayed in their debates by the least motive.9 This we find confirmed by
daily experience. When an absurdity strikes a member, he conveys it to his neighbour,
and so on, till the whole be infected. Separate this great body; and though every
member be only of middling sense, it is not probable, that any thing but reason can
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 284 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
prevail over the whole. Influence and example being removed, good sense will always
get the better of bad among a number of people.c
There are two things to be guarded against in every senate: Its combination, and its
division. Its combination is most dangerous. And against this inconvenience we have
provided the following remedies. 1. The great dependence of the senators on the
people by annual elections; and that not by an undistinguishing rabble, like the
English electors, but by men of fortune and education. 2. The small power they are
allowed. They have few offices to dispose of. Almost all are given by the magistrates
in the counties. 3. The court of competitors, which being composed of men that are
their rivals, next to them in interest, and uneasy in their present situation, will be sure
to take all advantages against them.
The division of the senate is prevented, 1. By the smallness of their number. 2. As
faction supposes a combination in a separate interest, it is prevented by their
dependence on the people. 3. They have a power of expelling any factious member. It
is true, when another member of the same spirit comes from the county, they have no
power of expelling him: Nor is it fit they should; for that shows the humour to be in
the people, and may possibly arise from some ill conduct in public affairs. 4. Almost
any man, in a senate so regularly chosen by the people, may be supposed fit for any
civil office. It would be proper, therefore, for the senate to form some general
resolutions with regard to the disposing of offices among the members: Which
resolutions would not confine them in critical times, when extraordinary parts on the
one hand, or extraordinary stupidity on the other, appears in any senator; but they
would be sufficient to preventd intrigue and faction, by making the disposal of the
offices a thing of course. For instance, let it be a resolution, That no man shall enjoy
any office, till he has sat four years in the senate: That, except ambassadors, no man
shall be in office two years following: That no man shall attain the higher offices but
through the lower: That no man shall be protector twice, &c. The senate of Venice
govern themselves by such resolutions.
In foreign politics the interest of the senate can scarcely ever be divided from that of
the people; and therefore it is fit to make the senate absolute with regard to them;
otherwise there could be no secrecy or refined policy. Besides, without money no
alliance can be executed; and the senate is still sufficiently dependant. Not to mention,
that the legislative power being always superior to the executive, the magistrates or
representatives may interpose whenever they think proper.
The chief support of the British government is the opposition of interests; but that,
though in the main serviceable, breeds endless factions. In the foregoing plan, it does
all the good without any of the harm. The competitors have no power of controlling
the senate: They have only the power of accusing, and appealing to the people.
It is necessary, likewise, to prevent both combination and division in the thousand
magistrates. This is done sufficiently by the separation of places and interests.
But lest that should not be sufficient, their dependence on the 10,000 for their
elections, serves to the same purpose.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 285 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Nor is that all: For the 10,000 may resume the power whenever they please; and not
only when they all please, but when any five of a hundred please, which will happen
upon the very first suspicion of a separate interest.
The 10,000 are too large a body either to unite or divide, except when they meet in
one place, and fall under the guidance of ambitious leaders. Not to mention their
annual election,e by the whole body of the people, that are of any consideration.
A small commonwealth is the happiest government in the world within itself, because
every thing lies under the eye of the rulers: But it may be subdued by great force from
without. This scheme seems to have all the advantages both of a great and a little
commonwealth.
Every county-law may be annulled either by the senate or another county; because
that shows an opposition of interest: In which case no part ought to decide for itself.
The matter must be referred to the whole, which will best determine what agrees with
general interest.
As to the clergy and militia, the reasons of these orders are obvious. Without the
dependence of the clergy on the civil magistrates, and without a militia, it is in vain to
think that any free government will ever have security or stability.
In many governments, the inferior magistrates have no rewards but what arise from
their ambition, vanity, or public spirit. The salaries of the French judges amount not to
the interest of the sums they pay for their offices. The Dutch burgo-masters have little
more immediate profit than the English justices of peace, or the members of the house
of commons formerly. But lest any should suspect, that this would beget negligence in
the administration (which is little to be feared, considering the natural ambition of
mankind), let the magistrates have competent salaries. The senators have access to so
many honourable and lucrative offices, that their attendance needs not be bought.
There is little attendance required of the representatives.
That the foregoing plan of government is practicable, no one can doubt, who
considers the resemblance that it bears to the commonwealth of the United
Provinces,f a wise and renowned government. The alterations in the present scheme
seem all evidently for the better. 1. The representation is more equal. 2. The unlimited
power of the burgo-masters in the towns, which forms a perfect aristocracy in the
Dutch commonwealth, is corrected by a well-tempered democracy, in giving to the
people the annual election of the county representatives. 3. The negative, which every
province and town has upon the whole body of the Dutch republic, with regard to
alliances, peace and war, and the imposition of taxes, is here removed. 4. The
counties, in the present plan, are not so independent of each other, nor do they form
separate bodies so much as the seven provinces; where the jealousy and envy of the
smaller provinces and towns against the greater, particularly Holland and Amsterdam,
have frequently disturbed the government. 5. Larger powers, though of the safest
kind, are intrusted to the senate than the States-General possess; by which means, the
former may become more expeditious, and secret in their resolutions, than it is
possible for the latter.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 286 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The chief alterations that could be made on the British government, in order to bring it
to the most perfect model of limited monarchy, seem to be the following. First, The
plan of gCromwell’s parliament ought to be restored, by making the representation
equal, and by allowing none to vote in the county elections who possess noth a
property of 200 pounds value. Secondly, As such a house of Commons would be too
weighty for a frail house of Lords, like the present, the Bishops and Scotch Peers
ought to be removed:i The number of the upper house ought to be raised to three or
four hundred: Their seats not hereditary, but during life: They ought to have the
election of their own members; and no commoner should be allowed to refuse a seat
that was offered him. By this means the house of Lords would consist entirely of the
men of chief credit, abilities, and interest in the nation; and every turbulent leader in
the house of Commons might be taken off, and connected by interest with the house
of Peers. Such an aristocracy would be an excellent barrier both to the monarchy and
against it. At present, the balance of our government depends in some measure on the
abilities and behaviour of the sovereign; which are variable and uncertain
circumstances.
This plan of limited monarchy, however corrected, seems still liable to three great
inconveniencies. First, It removes not entirely, though it may soften, the parties of
court and country. Secondly, The king’s personal character must still have great
influence on the government. Thirdly, The sword is in the hands of a single person,
who will always neglect to discipline the militia, in order to have a pretence for
keeping up a standing army.j
We shall conclude this subject, with observing the falsehood of the common opinion,
that no large state, such as France or Great Britain, could ever be modelled into a
commonwealth, but that such a form of government can only take place in a city or
small territory. The contrary seems probable. Though it is more difficult to form a
republican government in an extensive country than in a city; there is more facility,
when once it is formed, of preserving it steady and uniform, without tumult and
faction. It is not easy, for the distant parts of a large state to combine in any plan of
free government; but they easily conspire in the esteem and reverence for a single
person, who, by means of this popular favour, may seize the power, and forcing the
more obstinate to submit, may establish a monarchical government. On the other
hand, a city readily concurs in the same notions of government, the natural equality of
property favours liberty, and the nearness of habitation enables the citizens mutually
to assist each other. Even under absolute princes, the subordinate government of cities
is commonly republican; while that of counties and provinces is monarchical. But
these same circumstances, which facilitate the erection of commonwealths in cities,
render their constitution more frail and uncertain. Democracies are turbulent. For
however the people may be separated or divided into small parties, either in their
votes or elections; their near habitation in a city will always make the force of popular
tides and currents very sensible. Aristocracies are better adapted for peace and order,
and accordingly were most admired by ancient writers; but they are jealous and
oppressive. In a large government, which is modelled with masterly skill, there is
compass and room enough to refine the democracy, from the lower people, who may
be admitted into the first elections or first concoction of the commonwealth, to the
higher magistrates, who direct all the movements. At the same time, the parts are so
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 287 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
distant and remote, that it is very difficult, either by intrigue, prejudice, or passion, to
hurry them into any measures against the public interest.
It is needless to enquire, whether such a government would be immortal. I allow the
justness of the poet’s exclamation on the endless projects of human race, Man and for
ever!10 The world itself probably is not immortal. Such consuming plagues may arise
as would leave even a perfect government a weak prey to its neighbours. We know
not to what length enthusiasm, or other extraordinary movements of the human mind,
may transport men, to the neglect of all order and public good. Where difference of
interest is removed, whimsical and unaccountable factions often arise, from personal
favour or enmity. Perhaps, rust may grow to the springs of the most accurate political
machine, and disorder its motions. Lastly, extensive conquests, when pursued, must
be the ruin of every free government; and of the more perfect governments sooner
than of the imperfect; because of the very advantages which the former possess above
the latter. And though such a state ought to establish a fundamental law against
conquests; yet republics have ambition as well as individuals, and present interest
makes men forgetful of their posterity. It is a sufficient incitement to human
endeavours, that such a government would flourish for many ages; without pretending
to bestow, on any work of man, that immortality, which the Almighty seems to have
refused to his own productions.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 288 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAYS WITHDRAWN AND UNPUBLISHED
ESSAY I
OF ESSAY-WRITING1
The elegant Part of Mankind, who are not immers’d in the animal Life, but employ
themselves in the Operations of the Mind, may be divided into the learned and
conversible. The Learned are such as have chosen for their Portion the higher and
more difficult Operations of the Mind, which require Leisure and Solitude, and cannot
be brought to Perfection, without long Preparation and severe Labour. The
conversible World join to a sociable Disposition, and a Taste of Pleasure, an
Inclination to the easier and more gentle Exercises of the Understanding, to obvious
Reflections on human Affairs, and the Duties of common Life, and to the Observation
of the Blemishes or Perfections of the particular Objects, that surround them. Such
Subjects of Thought furnish not sufficient Employment in Solitude, but require the
Company and Conversation of our Fellow-Creatures, to render them a proper Exercise
for the Mind: And this brings Mankind together in Society, where every one displays
his Thoughts and Observations in the best Manner he is able, and mutually gives and
receives Information, as well as Pleasure.
The Separation of the Learned from the conversible World seems to have been the
great Defect of the last Age, and must have had a very bad Influence both on Books
and Company: For what Possibility is there of finding Topics of Conversation fit for
the Entertainment of rational Creatures, without having Recourse sometimes to
History, Poetry, Politics, and the more obvious Principles, at least, of Philosophy?
Must our whole Discourse be a continued Series of gossipping Stories and idle
Remarks? Must the Mind never rise higher, but be perpetually
Stun’d and worn out with endless Chat
Of WILL did this, and NAN said that.2
This wou’d be to render the Time spent in Company the most unentertaining, as well
as the most unprofitable Part of our Lives.
On the other Hand, Learning has been as great a Loser by being shut up in Colleges
and Cells, and secluded from the World and good Company. By that Means, every
Thing of what we call Belles Lettres° became totally barbarous, being cultivated by
Men without any Taste of Life or Manners, and without that Liberty and Facility of
Thought and Expression, which can only be acquir’d by Conversation. Even
Philosophy went to Wrack by this moaping recluse Method of Study, and became as
chimerical in her Conclusions as she was unintelligible in her Stile and Manner of
Delivery. And indeed, what cou’d be expected from Men who never consulted
Experience in any of their Reasonings, or who never search’d for that Experience,
where alone it is to be found, in common Life and Conversation?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 289 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
’Tis with great Pleasure I observe, That Men of Letters, in this Age, have lost, in a
great Measure, that Shyness and Bashfulness of Temper, which kept them at a
Distance from Mankind; and, at the same Time, That Men of the World are proud of
borrowing from Books their most agreeable Topics of Conversation. ’Tis to be hop’d,
that this League betwixt the learned and conversible Worlds, which is so happily
begun, will be still farther improv’d to their mutual Advantage; and to that End, I
know nothing more advantageous than such Essays as these with which I endeavour
to entertain the Public. In this View, I cannot but consider myself as a Kind of
Resident or Ambassador from the Dominions of Learning to those of Conversation;
and shall think it my constant Duty to promote a good Correspondence betwixt these
two States, which have so great a Dependence on each other. I shall give Intelligence
to the Learned of whatever passes in Company, and shall endeavour to import into
Company whatever Commodities I find in my native Country proper for their Use and
Entertainment. The Balance of Trade we need not be jealous of, nor will there be any
Difficulty to preserve it on both Sides. The Materials of this Commerce must chiefly
be furnish’d by Conversation and common Life: The manufacturing of them alone
belongs to Learning.
As ’twou’d be an unpardonable Negligence in an Ambassador not to pay his Respects
to the Sovereign of the State where he is commission’d to reside; so it wou’d be
altogether inexcusable in me not to address myself, with a particular Respect, to the
Fair Sex, who are the Sovereigns of the Empire of Conversation. I approach them
with Reverence; and were not my Countrymen, the Learned, a stubborn independent
Race of Mortals, extremely jealous of their Liberty, and unaccustom’d to Subjection, I
shou’d resign into their fair Hands the sovereign Authority over the Republic of
Letters. As the Case stands, my Commission extends no farther, than to desire a
League, offensive and defensive, against our common Enemies, against the Enemies
of Reason and Beauty, People of dull Heads and cold Hearts. From this Moment let us
pursue them with the severest Vengeance: Let no Quarter be given, but to those of
sound Understandings and delicate Affections; and these Characters, ’tis to be
presum’d, we shall always find inseparable.
To be serious, and to quit the Allusion before it be worn thread-bare, I am of Opinion,
that Women, that is, Women of Sense and Education (for to such alone I address
myself) are much better Judges of all polite Writing than Men of the same Degree of
Understanding; and that ’tis a vain Pannic, if they be so far terrify’d with the common
Ridicule that is levell’d against learned Ladies, as utterly to abandon every Kind of
Books and Study to our Sex. Let the Dread of that Ridicule have no other Effect, than
to make them conceal their Knowledge before Fools, who are not worthy of it, nor of
them. Such will still presume upon the vain Title of the Male Sex to affect a
Superiority above them: But my fair Readers may be assur’d, that all Men of Sense,
who know the World, have a great Deference for their Judgment of such Books as ly
within the Compass of their Knowledge, and repose more Confidence in the Delicacy
of their Taste, tho’ unguided by Rules, than in all the dull Labours of Pedants and
Commentators. In a neighbouring Nation, equally famous for good Taste, and for
Gallantry, the Ladies are, in a Manner, the Sovereigns of the learned World, as well
as of the conversible; and no polite Writer pretends to venture upon the Public,
without the Approbation of some celebrated Judges of that Sex. Their Verdict is,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 290 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
indeed, sometimes complain’d of; and, in particular, I find, that the Admirers of
Corneille, to save that great Poet’s Honour upon the Ascendant that Racine began to
take over him, always said, That it was not to be expected, that so old a Man could
dispute the Prize, before such Judges, with so young a Man as his Rival. But this
Observation has been found unjust, since Posterity seems to have ratify’d the Verdict
of that Tribunal: And Racine, tho’ dead, is still the Favourite of the Fair Sex, as well
as of the best Judges among the Men.
There is only one Subject, on which I am apt to distrust the Judgment of Females, and
that is, concerning Books of Gallantry and Devotion, which they commonly affect° as
high flown as possible; and most of them seem more delighted with the Warmth, than
with the justness of the Passion. I mention Gallantry and Devotion as the same
Subject, because, in Reality, they become the same when treated in this Manner; and
we may observe, that they both depend upon the very same Complexion. As the Fair
Sex have a great Share of the tender and amorous Disposition, it perverts their
Judgment on this Occasion, and makes them be easily affected, even by what has no
Propriety in the Expression nor Nature in the Sentiment. Mr. Addison’s elegant
Discourses of Religion have no Relish with them, in Comparison of Books of mystic
Devotion: And Otway’s Tragedies are rejected for the Rants of Mr. Dryden.3
Wou’d the Ladies correct their false Taste in this Particular; Let them accustom
themselves a little more to Books of all Kinds: Let them give Encouragement to Men
of Sense and Knowledge to frequent their Company: And finally, let them concur
heartily in that Union I have projected betwixt the learned and conversible Worlds.
They may, perhaps, meet with more Complaisance from their usual Followers than
from Men of Learning; but they cannot reasonably expect so sincere an Affection:
And, I hope, they will never be guilty of so wrong a Choice, as to sacrifice the
Substance to the Shadow.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 291 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY II
OF MORAL PREJUDICES1
There is a Set of Men lately sprung up amongst us, who endeavour to distinguish
themselves by ridiculing every Thing, that has hitherto appear’d sacred and venerable
in the Eyes of Mankind. Reason, Sobriety, Honour, Friendship, Marriage, are the
perpetual Subjects of their insipid Raillery: And even public Spirit, and a Regard to
our Country, are treated as chimerical and romantic. Were the Schemes of these Antireformers
to take Place, all the Bonds of Society must be broke, to make Way for the
Indulgence of a licentious Mirth and Gaiety: The Companion of our drunken Frollics
must be prefer’d to a Friend or Brother: Dissolute Prodigality must be supply’d at the
Expence of every Thing valuable, either in public or private: And Men shall have so
little Regard to any Thing beyond themselves, that, at last, a free Constitution of
Government must become a Scheme perfectly impracticable among Mankind, and
must degenerate into one universal System of Fraud and Corruption.
There is another Humour, which may be observ’d in some Pretenders to Wisdom, and
which, if not so pernicious as the idle petulant Humour above-mention’d, must,
however, have a very bad Effect on those, who indulge it. I mean that grave
philosophic Endeavour after Perfection, which, under Pretext of reforming Prejudices
and Errors, strikes at all the most endearing Sentiments of the Heart, and all the most
useful Byasses and Instincts, which can govern a human Creature. The Stoics were
remarkable for this Folly among the Antients; and I wish some of more venerable
Characters in latter Times had not copy’d them too faithfully in this Particular. The
virtuous and tender Sentiments, or Prejudices, if you will, have suffer’d mightily by
these Reflections; while a certain sullen Pride or Contempt of Mankind has prevail’d
in their Stead, and has been esteem’d the greatest Wisdom; tho’, in Reality, it be the
most egregious Folly of all others. Statilius being sollicited by Brutus to make one of
that noble Band, who struck the GOD-like Stroke for the Liberty of Rome, refus’d to
accompany them, saying, That all Men were Fools or Mad, and did not deserve that a
wise Man should trouble his Head about them.2
My learned Reader will here easily recollect the Reason, which an antient Philosopher
gave, why he wou’d not be reconcil’d to his Brother, who sollicited his Friendship.
He was too much a Philosopher to think, that the Connexion of having sprung from
the same Parent, ought to have any Influence on a reasonable Mind, and exprest his
Sentiment after such a Manner as I think not proper to repeat.3 When your Friend is
in Affliction, says Epictetus, you may counterfeit a Sympathy with him, if it give him
Relief; but take Care not to allow any Compassion to sink into your Heart, or disturb
that Tranquillity, which is the Perfection of Wisdom.4Diogenes being askt by his
Friends in his Sickness, What should be done with him after his Death? Why, says he,
throw me out into the Fields. “What! reply’d they, to the Birds or Beasts.” No: Place
a Cudgel by me, to defend myself withal. “To what Purpose, say they, you will not
have any Sense, nor any Power of making Use of it.” Then if the Beasts shou’d devour
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 292 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
me, cries he, shall I be any more sensible of it? I know none of the Sayings of that
Philosopher, which shews more evidently both the Liveliness and Ferocity of his
Temper.5
How different from these are the Maxims by which Eugenius conducts himself! In his
Youth he apply’d himself, with the most unwearied Labour, to the Study of
Philosophy; and nothing was ever able to draw him from it, except when an
Opportunity offer’d of serving his Friends, or doing a Pleasure to some Man of Merit.
When he was about thirty Years of Age, he was determin’d to quit the free Life of a
Batchelor (in which otherwise he wou’d have been inclin’d to remain) by considering,
that he was the last Branch of an antient Family, which must have been extinguish’d
had he died without Children. He made Choice of the virtuous and beautiful Emira for
his Consort, who, after being the Solace of his Life for many Years, and having made
him the Father of several Children, paid at last the general Debt to Nature. Nothing
cou’d have supported him under so severe an Affliction, but the Consolation he
receiv’d from his young Family, who were now become dearer to him on account of
their deceast Mother. One Daughter in particular is his Darling, and the secret Joy of
his Soul; because her Features, her Air, her Voice recal every Moment the tender
Memory of his Spouse, and fill his Eyes with Tears. He conceals this Partiality as
much as possible; and none but his intimate Friends are acquainted with it. To them
he reveals all his Tenderness; nor is he so affectedly Philosophical, as even to call it
by the Name of Weakness. They know, that he still keeps the Birth-day of Emira with
Tears, and a more fond and tender Recollection of past Pleasures; in like Manner as it
was celebrated in her Lifetime with Joy and Festivity. They know, that he preserves
her Picture with the utmost Care, and has one Picture in Miniature, which he always
wears next to his Bosom: That he has left Orders in his last Will, that, in whatever
Part of the World he shall happen to die, his Body shall be transported, and laid in the
same Grave with her’s: And that a Monument shall be erected over them, and their
mutual Love and Happiness celebrated in an Epitaph, which he himself has compos’d
for that Purpose.6
A few Years ago I receiv’d a Letter from a Friend, who was abroad on his Travels,
and shall here communicate it to the Public. It contains such an Instance of a
Philosophic Spirit, as I think pretty extraordinary, and may serve as an Example, not
to depart too far from the receiv’d Maxims of Conduct and Behaviour, by a refin’d
Search after Happiness or Perfection. The Story I have been since assur’d of as Matter
of Fact.
Paris,Aug. 2, 1737.
Sir,—
I know you are more curious of Accounts of Men than of Buildings, and are more
desirous of being inform’d of private History than of public Transactions; for which
Reason, I thought the following Story, which is the common Topic of Conversation in
this City, wou’d be no unacceptable Entertainment to you.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 293 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
A young Lady of Birth and Fortune, being left intirely at her own Disposal, persisted
long in a Resolution of leading a single Life, notwithstanding several advantageous
Offers that had been made to her. She had been determin’d to embrace this
Resolution, by observing the many unhappy Marriages among her Acquaintance, and
by hearing the Complaints, which her Female Friends made of the Tyranny,
Inconstancy, Jealousy or Indifference of their Husbands. Being a Woman of strong
Spirit and an uncommon Way of thinking, she found no Difficulty either in forming
or maintaining this Resolution, and cou’d not suspect herself of such Weakness, as
ever to be induc’d, by any Temptation, to depart from it. She had, however,
entertain’d a strong Desire of having a Son, whose Education she was resolv’d to
make the principal Concern of her Life, and by that Means supply the Place of those
other Passions, which she was resolv’d for ever to renounce. She push’d her
Philosophy to such an uncommon Length, as to find no Contradiction betwixt such a
Desire and her former Resolution; and accordingly look’d about, with great
Deliberation, to find, among all her Male-Acquaintance, one whose Character and
Person were agreeable to her, without being able to satisfy herself on that Head. At
Length, being in the Play-house one Evening, she sees in the Parterre,° a young Man
of a most engaging Countenance and modest Deportment; and feels such a Prepossession
in his Favour, that she had Hopes this must be the Person she had long
sought for in vain. She immediately dispatches a Servant to him; desiring his
Company, at her Lodgings, next Morning. The young Man was over-joy’d at the
Message, and cou’d not command his Satisfaction, upon receiving such an Advance
from a Lady of so great Beauty, Reputation and Quality. He was, therefore, much
disappointed, when he found a Woman, who wou’d allow him no Freedoms; and
amidst all her obliging Behaviour, confin’d and over-aw’d him to the Bounds of
rational Discourse and Conversation. She seem’d, however, willing to commence a
Friendship with him; and told him, that his Company wou’d always be acceptable to
her, whenever he had a leisure Hour to bestow. He needed not much Entreaty to
renew his Visits, being so struck with her Wit and Beauty, that he must have been
unhappy, had he been debarr’d her Company. Every Conversation serv’d only the
more to inflame his Passion, and gave him more Occasion to admire her Person and
Understanding, as well as to rejoice in his own Good-fortune. He was not, however,
without Anxiety, when he consider’d the Disproportion of their Birth and Fortune; nor
was his Uneasiness allay’d even when he reflected on the extraordinary Manner in
which their Acquaintance had commenc’d. Our Philosophical Heroine, in the mean
Time, discover’d, that her Lover’s personal Qualities did not belye his Phisiognomy° ;
so that, judging there was no Occasion for any farther Trial, she takes a proper
Opportunity of communicating to him her whole Intention. Their Intercourse
continu’d for sometime, till at last her Wishes were crown’d, and she was now Mother
of a Boy, who was to be the Object of her future Care and Concern. Gladly wou’d she
have continu’d her Friendship with the Father; but finding him too passionate a Lover
to remain within the Bounds of Friendship, she was oblig’d to put a Violence upon°
herself. She sends him a Letter, in which she had inclos’d a Bond of Annuity for a
Thousand Crowns; desiring him, at the same Time, never to see her more, and to
forget, if possible, all past Favours and Familiarities. He was Thunder-struck at
receiving this Message; and, having tried, in vain, all the Arts that might win upon the
Resolution of a Woman, resolv’d at last to attack her by her Foible. He commences a
Law-suit against her before the Parliament of Paris; and claims his Son, whom he
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 294 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
pretends a Right to educate as he pleas’d, according to the usual Maxims of the Law
in such Cases. She pleads, on the other Hand, their express Agreement before their
Commerce, and pretends, that he had renounc’d all Claim to any Offspring that might
arise from their Embraces. It is not yet known, how the Parliament will determine in
this extraordinary Case, which puzzles all the Lawyers, as much as it does the
Philosophers. As soon as they come to any Issue, I shall inform you of it, and shall
embrace any Opportunity of subscribing° myself, as I do at present.
SIR,
Your Most Humble Servant.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 295 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY III
OF THE MIDDLE STATION OF LIFE1
The Moral of the following Fable will easily discover itself, without my explaining it.
One Rivulet meeting another, with whom he had been long united in strictest Amity,
with noisy Haughtiness and Disdain thus bespoke him, “What, Brother! Still in the
same State! Still low and creeping! Are you not asham’d, when you behold me, who,
tho’ lately in a like Condition with you, am now become a great River, and shall
shortly be able to rival the Danube or the Rhine, provided those friendly Rains
continue, which have favour’d my Banks, but neglected yours.” Very true, replies the
humble Rivulet; “You are now, indeed, swoln to great Size: But methinks you are
become, withal, somewhat turbulent and muddy. I am contented with my low
Condition and my Purity.”
Instead of commenting upon this Fable, I shall take Occasion, from it, to compare the
different Stations of Life, and to perswade such of my Readers as are plac’d in the
Middle Station to be satisfy’d with it, as the most eligible of all others. These form the
most numerous Rank of Men, that can be suppos’d susceptible of Philosophy; and
therefore, all Discourses of Morality ought principally to be address’d to them. The
Great are too much immers’d in Pleasure; and the Poor too much occupy’d in
providing for the Necessities of Life, to hearken to the calm Voice of Reason. The
Middle Station, as it is most happy in many Respects, so particularly in this, that a
Man, plac’d in it, can, with the greatest Leisure, consider his own Happiness, and reap
a new Enjoyment, from comparing his Situation with that of Persons above or below
him.
Agur’s Prayer2 is sufficiently noted. Two Things have I requir’d of thee, deny me
them not before I die, Remove far from me Vanity and Lies; Give me neither Poverty
nor Riches, feed me with Food convenient for me: Lest I be full and deny thee, and
say, Who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my GOD in
vain. The middle Station is here justly recommended, as affording the fullest Security
for Virtue; and I may also add, that it gives Opportunity for the most ample Exercise
of it, and furnishes Employment for every good Quality, which we can possibly be
possest of. Those, who are plac’d among the lower Rank of Men, have little
Opportunity of exerting any other Virtue, besides those of Patience, Resignation,
Industry and Integrity. Those, who are advanc’d into the higher Stations, have full
Employment for their Generosity, Humanity, Affability and Charity. When a Man
lyes betwixt these two Extremes, he can exert the former Virtues towards his
Superiors, and the latter towards his Inferiors. Every moral Quality, which the human
Soul is susceptible of, may have its Turn, and be called up to Action: And a Man may,
after this Manner, be much more certain of his Progress in Virtue, than where his
good Qualities lye dormant, and without Employment.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 296 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
But there is another Virtue, that seems principally to ly among Equals, and is, for that
Reason, chiefly calculated for the middle Station of Life. This Virtue is Friendship. I
believe most Men of generous Tempers are apt to envy the Great, when they consider
the large Opportunities such Persons have of doing Good to their Fellow-creatures,
and of acquiring the Friendship and Esteem of Men of Merit. They make no Advances
in vain, and are not oblig’d to associate with those whom they have little Kindness
for; like People of inferior Stations, who are subject to have their Proffers of
Friendship rejected, even where they wou’d be most fond of placing their Affections.
But tho’ the Great have more Facility in acquiring Friendships, they cannot be so
certain of the Sincerity of them, as Men of a lower Rank; since the Favours, they
bestow, may acquire them Flattery, instead of Good-will and Kindness. It has been
very judiciously remark’d, that we attach ourselves more by the Services we perform
than by those we receive, and that a Man is in Danger of losing his Friends by
obliging them too far. I shou’d, therefore, chuse to ly in the middle Way, and to have
my Commerce with my Friend varied both by Obligations given and receiv’d. I have
too much Pride to be willing that all the Obligations should ly on my Side; and shou’d
be afraid, that, if they all lay on his, he wou’d also have too much Pride to be entirely
easy under them, or have a perfect Complacency in my Company.
We may also remark of the middle Station of Life, that it is more favourable to the
acquiring of Wisdom and Ability, as well as of Virtue, and that a Man so situate has a
better Chance for attaining a Knowledge both of Men and Things, than those of a
more elevated Station. He enters, with more Familiarity, into human Life: Every
Thing appears in its natural Colours before him: He has more Leisure to form
Observations; and has, beside, the Motive of Ambition to push him on in his
Attainments; being certain, that he can never rise to any Distinction or Eminence in
the World, without his own Industry. And here I cannot forbear communicating a
Remark, which may appear somewhat extraordinary, viz. That ’tis wisely ordain’d by
Providence, that the middle Station shou’d be the most favourable to the improving
our natural Abilities, since there is really more Capacity requisite to perform the
Duties of that Station, than is requisite to act in the higher Spheres of Life. There are
more natural Parts, and a stronger Genius requisite to make a good Lawyer or
Physician, than to make a great Monarch. For let us take any Race or Succession of
Kings, where Birth alone gives a Title to the Crown: The English Kings, for Instance;
who have not been esteemed the most shining in History. From the Conquest to the
Succession of his present Majesty, we may reckon twenty eight Sovereigns, omitting
those who died Minors. Of these, eight are esteem’d Princes of great Capacity, viz. the
Conqueror,3Harry II.4Edward I.5Edward III. Harry V.6 and VII. Elisabeth,7 and the
late King William. Now, I believe every one will allow, that, in the common Run of
Mankind, there are not eight out of twenty eight, who are fitted, by Nature, to make a
Figure either on the Bench or at the Bar. Since Charles VII.8 ten Monarchs have
reign’d in France, omitting Francis II.9 Five of these have been esteem’d Princes of
Capacity, viz. Loüis XI.10 XII. and XIV. Francis I.11 and Harry IV. In short, the
governing of Mankind well, requires a great deal of Virtue, Justice, and Humanity,
but not a surprising Capacity. A certain Pope, whose Name I have forgot, us’d to say,
Let us divert ourselves, my Friends, the World governs itself. There are, indeed, some
critical Times, such as those in which Harry IV. liv’d, that call for the utmost Vigour;
and a less Courage and Capacity, than what appear’d in that great Monarch, must
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 297 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
have sunk under the Weight. But such Circumstances are rare; and even then, Fortune
does, at least, one Half of the Business.
Since the common Professions, such as Law or Physic, require equal, if not superior
Capacity, to what are exerted in the higher Spheres of Life, ’tis evident, that the Soul
must be made of still a finer Mold, to shine in Philosophy or Poetry, or in any of the
higher Parts of Learning. Courage and Resolution are chiefly requisite in a
Commander: Justice and Humanity in a Statesman: But Genius and Capacity in a
Scholar. Great Generals, and great Politicians, are found in all Ages and Countries of
the World, and frequently start up, at once, even amongst the greatest Barbarians.
Sweden was sunk in Ignorance, when it produc’d Gustavus Ericson,12 and Gustavus
Adolphus:13Muscovy, when the Czar14 appear’d: And, perhaps, Carthage, when it
gave Birth to Hannibal. But England must pass thro’ a long Gradation of its
Spencers,15Johnsons,16Wallers, Drydens, before it arrive at an Addison or a Pope. A
happy Talent for the liberal Arts and Sciences, is a Kind of Prodigy among Men.
Nature must afford the richest Genius that comes from her Hands; Education and
Example must cultivate it from the earliest Infancy; And Industry must concur to
carry it to any Degree of Perfection. No Man needs be surprised to see Kouli-Kan17
among the Persians: but Homer, in so early an Age, among the Greeks, is certainly
Matter of the highest Wonder.
A Man cannot show a Genius for War, who is not so fortunate as to be trusted with
Command; and it seldom happens, in any State or Kingdom, that several, at once, are
plac’d in that Situation. How many Marlboroughs18 were there in the confederate
Army, who never rose so much as to the Command of a Regiment? But I am
perswaded, there has been but one Milton in England within these hundred Years;
because every one may exert the Talents for Poetry who is possest of them; and no
one cou’d exert them under greater Disadvantages than that divine Poet. If no Man
were allow’d to write Verses, but who was, before-hand, nam’d to be laureat, cou’d
we expect a Poet in ten thousand Years?
Were we to distinguish the Ranks of Men by their Genius and Capacity more, than by
their Virtue and Usefulness to the Public, great Philosophers wou’d certainly
challenge the first Rank, and must be plac’d at the Top of human Kind. So rare is this
Character, that, perhaps, there has not, as yet, been above two in the World, who can
lay a just Claim to it. At least, Galilæo and Newton seem to me so far to excel all the
rest, that I cannot admit any other into the same Class with them.
Great Poets may challenge the second Place; and this Species of Genius, tho’ rare, is
yet much more frequent than the former. Of the Greek Poets that remain, Homer alone
seems to merit this Character: Of the Romans, Virgil, Horace and Lucretius: Of the
English, Milton and Pope: Corneille, Racine, Boileau19 and Voltaire of the French:
And Tasso and Ariosto of the Italians.
Great Orators and Historians are, perhaps, more rare than great Poets: But as the
Opportunities for exerting the Talents requisite for Eloquence, or acquiring the
Knowledge requisite for writing History, depend, in some Measure, upon Fortune, we
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 298 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
cannot pronounce these Productions of Genius to be more extraordinary than the
former.
I should now return from this Digression, and show, that the middle Station of Life is
more favourable to Happiness, as well as to Virtue and Wisdom: But as the
Arguments, that prove this, seem pretty obvious, I shall here forbear insisting on
them.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 299 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY IV
OF IMPUDENCE AND MODESTY1
I am of opinion, That the common complaints against Providence are ill-grounded,
and that the good or bad qualities of men are the causes of their good or bad fortune,
more than what is generally imagined. There are, no doubt, instances to the contrary,
and these too pretty numerous; but few, in comparison of the instances we have of a
right distribution of prosperity and adversity: nor indeed could it be otherwise from
the common course of human affairs. To be endowed with a benevolent disposition,
and to love others, will almost infallibly procure love and esteem; which is the chief
circumstance in life, and facilitates every enterprize and undertaking; besides the
satisfaction, which immediately results from it. The case is much the same with the
other virtues. Prosperity is naturally, though not necessarily, attached to virtue and
merit; and adversity, in like manner, to vice and folly.
I must, however, confess, that this rule admits of an exception, with regard to one
moral quality; and that modesty has a natural tendency to conceal a man’s talents, as
impudence displays them to the utmost, and has been the only cause why many have
risen in the world, under all the disadvantages of low birth and little merit. Such
indolence and incapacity is there in the generality of mankind, that they are apt to
receive a man for whatever he has a mind to put himself off for; and admit his
overbearing airs as proofs of that merit which he assumes to himself. A decent
assurance seems to be the natural attendant of virtue; and few men can distinguish
impudence from it: As, on the other hand, diffidence, being the natural result of vice
and folly, has drawn disgrace upon modesty, which in outward appearance so nearly
resembles it.a
As impudence, though really a vice, has the same effects upon a man’s fortune, as if it
were a virtue; so we may observe, that it is almost as difficult to be attained, and is, in
that respect, distinguished from all the other vices, which are acquired with little
pains, and continually encrease upon indulgence. Many a man, being sensible that
modesty is extremely prejudicial to him in making his fortune, has resolved to be
impudent, and to put a bold face upon the matter: But, it is observable, that such
people have seldom succeeded in the attempt, but have been obliged to relapse into
their primitive modesty. Nothing carries a man through the world like a true genuine
natural impudence. Its counterfeit is good for nothing, nor can ever support itself. In
any other attempt, whatever faults a man commits and is sensible of, he is so much the
nearer his end. But when he endeavours at impudence, if he ever failed in the attempt,
the remembrance of that failure will make him blush, and will infallibly disconcert
him: After which every blush is a cause for new blushes, till he be found out to be an
arrant° cheat, and a vain pretender to impudence.
If any thing can give a modest man more assurance, it must be some advantages of
fortune, which chance procures to him. Riches naturally gain a man a favourable
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 300 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
reception in the world, and give merit a double lustre, when a person is endowed with
it; and supply its place, in a great measure, when it is absent. It is wonderful to
observe what airs of superiority fools and knaves, with large possessions, give
themselves above men of the greatest merit in poverty. Nor do the men of merit make
any strong opposition to these usurpations; or rather seem to favour them by the
modesty of their behaviour. Their good sense and experience make them diffident of
their judgment, and cause them to examine every thing with the greatest accuracy: As,
on the other hand, the delicacy of their sentiments makes them timorous lest they
commit faults, and lose in the practice of the world that integrity of virtue, so to
speak, of which they are so jealous. To make wisdom agree with confidence, is as
difficult as to reconcile vice and modesty.
These are the reflections which have occurred upon this subject of impudence and
modesty; and I hope the reader will not be displeased to see them wrought into the
following allegory,
Jupiter, in the beginning, joined Virtue, Wisdom, and Confidence together; and Vice,
Folly, and Diffidence: And thus connected, sent them into the world. But though he
thought he had matched them with great judgment, and said that Confidence was the
natural companion of Virtue, and that Vice deserved to be attended with Diffidence,
they had not gone far before dissension arose among them. Wisdom, who was the
guide of the one company, was always accustomed before she ventured upon any
road, however beaten, to examine it carefully; to enquire whither it led; what dangers,
difficulties and hindrances might possibly or probably occur in it. In these
deliberations she usually consumed some time; which delay was very displeasing to
Confidence, who was always inclined to hurry on, without much forethought or
deliberation, in the first road he met. Wisdom and Virtue were inseparable: But
Confidence one day, following his impetuous nature, advanced a considerable way
before his guides and companions; and not feeling any want of their company, he
never enquired after them, nor ever met with them more. In like manner, the other
society, though joined by Jupiter, disagreed and separated. As Folly saw very little
way before her, she had nothing to determine concerning the goodness of roads, nor
could give the preference to one above another; and this want of resolution was
encreased by Diffidence, who, with her doubts and scruples, always retarded the
journey. This was a great annoyance to Vice, who loved not to hear of difficulties and
delays, and was never satisfied without his full career, in whatever his inclinations led
him to. Folly, he knew, though she harkened to Diffidence, would be easily managed
when alone; and therefore, as a vicious horse throws his rider, he openly beat away
this controller of all his pleasures, and proceeded in his journey with Folly, from
whom he is inseparable. Confidence and Diffidence being, after this manner, both
thrown loose from their respective companies, wandered for some time; till at last
chance led them at the same time to one village. Confidence went directly up to the
great house, which belonged to Wealth, the lord of the village; and without staying for
a porter, intruded himself immediately into the innermost apartments, where he found
Vice and Folly well received before him. He joined the train; recommended himself
very quickly to his landlord; and entered into such familiarity with Vice, that he was
enlisted in the same company with Folly. They were frequent guests of Wealth, and
from that moment inseparable. Diffidence, in the mean time, not daring to approach
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 301 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the great house, accepted of an invitation from Poverty, one of the tenants; and
entering the cottage, found Wisdom and Virtue, who being repulsed by the landlord,
had retired thither. Virtue took compassion of her, and Wisdom found, from her
temper, that she would easily improve: So they admitted her into their society.
Accordingly, by their means, she altered in a little time somewhat of her manner, and
becoming much more amiable and engaging, was now known by the name of
Modesty. As ill company has a greater effect than good, Confidence, though more
refractory to counsel and example, degenerated so far by the society of Vice and
Folly, as to pass by the name of Impudence. Mankind, who saw these societies as
Jupiter first joined them, and know nothing of these mutual desertions, are thereby led
into strange mistakes; and wherever they see Impudence, make account of finding
Virtue and Wisdom; and wherever they observe Modesty, call her attendants Vice and
Folly.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 302 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY V
OF LOVE AND MARRIAGE1
I know not whence it proceeds, that women are so apt to take amiss every thing which
is said in disparagement of the married state; and always consider a satyr° upon
matrimony as a satyr upon themselves. Do they mean, that they are the parties
principally concerned, and that if a backwardness° to enter into that state should
prevail in the world, they would be the greatest sufferers? Or, are they sensible, that
the misfortunes and miscarriages of the married state are owing more to their sex than
to ours? I hope they do not intend to confess either of these two particulars, or to give
such an advantage to their adversaries, the men, as even to allow them to suspect it.
I have often had thoughts of complying with this humour of the fair sex, and of
writing a panegyric upon marriage: But, in looking around for materials, they seemed
to be of so mixed a nature, that at the conclusion of my reflections, I found that I was
as much disposed to write a satyr, which might be placed on the opposite pages of the
panegyric: And I am afraid, that as satyr is, on most occasions, thought to contain
more truth than panegyric, I should have done their cause more harm than good by
this expedient. To misrepresent facts is what, I know, they will not require of me. I
must be more a friend to truth, than even to them, where their interests are opposite.
I shall tell the women what it is our sex complains of most in the married state; and if
they be disposed to satisfy us in this particular, all the other differences will easily be
accommodated. If I be not mistaken, ’tis their love of dominion, which is the ground
of the quarrel; tho’ ’tis very likely, that they will think it an unreasonable love of it in
us, which makes us insist so much upon that point. However this may be, no passion
seems to have more influence on female minds, than this for power; and there is a
remarkable instance in history of its prevailing above another passion, which is the
only one that can be supposed a proper counterpoise for it. We are told that all the
women in Scythia once conspired against the men, and kept the secret so well, that
they executed their design before they were suspected.2 They surprised the men in
drink, or asleep; bound them all fast in chains; and having called a solemn council of
the whole sex, it was debated what expedient should be used to improve the present
advantage, and prevent their falling again into slavery. To kill all the men did not
seem to the relish of any part of the assembly, notwithstanding the injuries formerly
received; and they were afterwards pleased to make a great merit of this lenity of
theirs. It was, therefore, agreed to put out the eyes of the whole male sex, and thereby
resign in all future time the vanity which they could draw from their beauty, in order
to secure their authority. We must no longer pretend to dress and show, say they; but
then we shall be free from slavery. We shall hear no more tender sighs; but in return
we shall hear no more imperious commands. Love must for ever leave us; but he will
carry subjection along with him.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 303 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
’Tis regarded by some as an unlucky circumstance, since the women were resolved to
maim the men, and deprive them of some of their senses, in order to render them
humble and dependent, that the sense of hearing could not serve their purpose, since
’tis probable the females would rather have attacked that than the sight: And I think it
is agreed among the learned, that, in a married state, ’tis not near so great an
inconvenience to lose the former sense as the latter. However this may be, we are told
by modern anecdotes, that some of the Scythian women did secretly spare their
husband’s eyes; presuming, I suppose, that they could govern them as well by means
of that sense as without it. But so incorrigible and untractable were these men, that
their wives were all obliged, in a few years, as their youth and beauty decayed, to
imitate the example of their sisters; which it was no difficult matter to do in a state
where the female sex had once got the superiority.
I know not if our Scottish ladies derive any thing of this humour from their Scythian
ancestors; but, I must confess that I have often been surprized to see a woman very
well pleased to take a fool for her mate, that she might govern with the less controul;
and could not but think her sentiments, in this respect, still more barbarous than those
of the Scythian women above-mentioned; as much as the eyes of the understanding
are more valuable than those of the body.
But to be just, and to lay the blame more equally, I am afraid it is the fault of our sex,
if the women be so fond of rule, and that if we did not abuse our authority, they would
never think it worth while to dispute it. Tyrants, we know, produce rebels; and all
history informs us, that rebels, when they prevail, are apt to become tyrants in their
turn. For this reason, I could wish there were no pretensions to authority on either
side; but that every thing was carried on with perfect equality, as between two equal
members of the same body. And to induce both parties to embrace those amicable
sentiments, I shall deliver to them Plato’s account of the origin of love and marriage.3
Mankind, according to that fanciful philosopher, were not, in their original, divided
into male and female, as at present; but each individual person was a compound of
both sexes, and was in himself both husband and wife, melted down into one living
creature. This union, no doubt, was very intire, and the parts very well adjusted
together, since there resulted a perfect harmony betwixt the male and female, altho’
they were obliged to be inseparable companions. And so great were the harmony and
happiness flowing from it, that the Androgynes (for so Plato calls them) or menwomen,
became insolent upon their prosperity, and rebelled against the Gods. To
punish them for this temerity, Jupiter could contrive no better expedient, than to
divorce the male-part from the female, and make two imperfect beings of the
compound, which was before so perfect. Hence the origin of men and women, as
distinct creatures. But notwithstanding this division, so lively is our remembrance of
the happiness which we enjoyed in our primæval state, that we are never at rest in this
situation; but each of these halves is continually searching thro’ the whole species to
find the other half, which was broken from it: And when they meet, they join again
with the greatest fondness and sympathy. But it often happens, that they are mistaken
in this particular; that they take for their half what no way corresponds to them; and
that the parts do not meet nor join in with each other, as is usual in fractures. In this
case the union was soon dissolved, and each part is set loose again to hunt for its lost
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 304 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
half, joining itself to every one whom it meets, by way of trial, and enjoying no rest
till its perfect sympathy with its partner shews, that it has at last been successful in its
endeavours.
Were I disposed to carry on this fiction of Plato, which accounts for the mutual love
betwixt the sexes in so agreeable a manner, I would do it by the following allegory.
When Jupiter had separated the male from the female, and had quelled their pride and
ambition by so severe an operation, he could not but repent him of the cruelty of his
vengeance, and take compassion on poor mortals, who were now become incapable of
any repose or tranquillity. Such cravings, such anxieties, such necessities arose, as
made them curse their creation, and think existence itself a punishment. In vain had
they recourse to every other occupation and amusement. In vain did they seek after
every pleasure of sense, and every refinement of reason. Nothing could fill that void,
which they felt in their hearts, or supply the loss of their partner, who was so fatally
separated from them. To remedy this disorder, and to bestow some comfort, at least,
on the human race in their forlorn situation, Jupiter sent down Love and Hymen to
collect the broken halves of human kind, and piece them together in the best manner
possible. These two deities found such a prompt disposition in mankind to unite again
in their primæval state, that they proceeded on their work with wonderful success for
some time; till at last, from many unlucky accidents, dissension arose betwixt them.
The chief counsellor and favourite of Hymen was Care, who was continually filling
his patron’s head with prospects of futurity; a settlement, family, children, servants;
so that little else was regarded in all the matches they made. On the other hand, Love
had chosen Pleasure for his favourite, who was as pernicious a counsellor as the other,
and would never allow Love to look beyond the present momentary gratification, or
the satisfying of the prevailing inclination. These two favourites became, in a little
time, irreconcileable enemies, and made it their chief business to undermine each
other in all their undertakings. No sooner had Love fixed upon two halves, which he
was cementing together, and forming to a close union, but Care insinuates himself,
and bringing Hymen along with him, dissolves the union produced by love, and joins
each half to some other half, which he had provided for it. To be revenged of this,
Pleasure creeps in upon a pair already joined by Hymen; and calling Love to his
assistance, they under hand contrive to join each half by secret links, to halves, which
Hymen was wholly unacquainted with. It was not long before this quarrel was felt in
its pernicious consequences; and such complaints arose before the throne of Jupiter,
that he was obliged to summon the offending parties to appear before him, in order to
give an account of their proceedings. After hearing the pleadings on both sides, he
ordered an immediate reconcilement betwixt Love and Hymen, as the only expedient
for giving happiness to mankind: And that he might be sure this reconcilement should
be durable, he laid his strict injunctions on them never to join any halves without
consulting their favourites Care and Pleasure, and obtaining the consent of both to the
conjunction. Where this order is strictly observed, the Androgyne is perfectly restored,
and the human race enjoy the same happiness as in their primæval state. The seam is
scarce perceived that joins the two beings; but both of them combine to form one
perfect and happy creature.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 305 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VI
OF THE STUDY OF HISTORY1
There is nothing which I would recommend more earnestly to my female readers than
the study of history, as an occupation, of all others, the best suited both to their sex
and education, much more instructive than their ordinary books of amusement, and
more entertaining than those serious compositions, which are usually to be found in
their closets. Among other important truths, which they may learn from history, they
may be informed of two particulars, the knowledge of which may contribute very
much to their quiet and repose; That our sex, as well as theirs, are far from being such
perfect creatures as they are apt to imagine, and, That Love is not the only passion,
which governs the male-world, but is often overcome by avarice, ambition, vanity,
and a thousand other passions. Whether they be the false representations of mankind
in those two particulars, which endear romances and novels so much to the fair sex, I
know not; but must confess that I am sorry to see them have such an aversion to
matter of fact, and such an appetite for falshood. I remember I was once desired by a
young beauty, for whom I had some passion, to send her some novels and romances
for her amusement in the country; but was not so ungenerous as to take the advantage,
which such a course of reading might have given me, being resolved not to make use
of poisoned arms against her. I therefore sent her Plutarch’s lives, assuring her, at the
same time, that there was not a word of truth in them from beginning to end. She
perused them very attentively, ’till she came to the lives of Alexander and Cæsar,
whose names she had heard of by accident; and then returned me the book, with many
reproaches for deceiving her.
I may indeed be told, that the fair sex have no such aversion to history, as I have
represented, provided it be secret history, and contain some memorable transaction
proper to excite their curiosity. But as I do not find that truth, which is the basis of
history, is at all regarded in those anecdotes, I cannot admit of this as a proof of their
passion for that study. However this may be, I see not why the same curiosity might
not receive a more proper direction, and lead them to desire accounts of those who
lived in past ages, as well as of their cotemporaries. What is it to Cleora, whether
Fulvia entertains a secret commerce of Love with Philander or not? Has she not equal
reason to be pleased, when she is informed (what is whispered about among
historians) that Cato’s sister had an intrigue with Cæsar, and palmed her son, Marcus
Brutus, upon her husband for his own, tho’ in reality he was her gallant’s? And are
not the loves of Messalina or Julia as proper subjects of discourse as any intrigue that
this city has produced of late years?2
But I know not whence it comes, that I have been thus seduced into a kind of raillery
against the ladies: Unless, perhaps, it proceed from the same cause, which makes the
person, who is the favourite of the company, be often the object of their good-natured
jests and pleasantries. We are pleased to address ourselves after any manner, to one
who is agreeable to us; and, at the same time, presume, that nothing will be taken
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 306 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
amiss by a person, who is secure of the good opinion and affections of every one
present. I shall now proceed to handle my subject more seriously, and shall point out
the many advantages, which flow from the study of history, and show how well suited
it is to every one, but particularly to those who are debarred the severer studies, by the
tenderness of their complexion,° and the weakness of their education. The advantages
found in history seem to be of three kinds, as it amuses the fancy, as it improves the
understanding, and as it strengthens virtue.
In reality, what more agreeable entertainment to the mind, than to be transported into
the remotest ages of the world, and to observe human society, in its infancy, making
the first faint essays° towards the arts and sciences: To see the policy of government,
and the civility of conversation refining by degrees, and every thing which is
ornamental to human life advancing towards its perfection. To remark the rise,
progress, declension, and final extinction of the most flourishing empires: The virtues,
which contributed to their greatness, and the vices, which drew on their ruin. In short,
to see all human race, from the beginning of time, pass, as it were, in review before
us; appearing in their true colours, without any of those disguises, which, during their
life-time, so much perplexed the judgment of the beholders. What spectacle can be
imagined, so magnificent, so various, so interesting? What amusement, either of the
senses or imagination, can be compared with it? Shall those trifling pastimes, which
engross so much of our time, be preferred as more satisfactory, and more fit to engage
our attention? How perverse must that taste be, which is capable of so wrong a choice
of pleasures?
But history is a most improving part of knowledge, as well as an agreeable
amusement; and a great part of what we commonly call Erudition, and value so
highly, is nothing but an acquaintance with historical facts. An extensive knowledge
of this kind belongs to men of letters; but I must think it an unpardonable ignorance in
persons of whatever sex or condition, not to be acquainted with the history of their
own country, together with the histories of ancient Greece and Rome. A woman may
behave herself with good manners, and have even some vivacity in her turn of wit; but
where her mind is so unfurnished, ’tis impossible her conversation can afford any
entertainment to men of sense and reflection.
I must add, that history is not only a valuable part of knowledge, but opens the door to
many other parts, and affords materials to most of the sciences. And indeed, if we
consider the shortness of human life, and our limited knowledge, even of what passes
in our own time, we must be sensible that we should be for ever children in
understanding, were it not for this invention, which extends our experience to all past
ages, and to the most distant nations; making them contribute as much to our
improvement in wisdom, as if they had actually lain under our observation. A man
acquainted with history may, in some respect, be said to have lived from the
beginning of the world, and to have been making continual additions to his stock of
knowledge in every century.
There is also an advantage in that experience which is acquired by history, above
what is learned by the practice of the world, that it brings° us acquainted with human
affairs, without diminishing in the least from the most delicate sentiments of virtue.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 307 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
And, to tell the truth, I know not any study or occupation so unexceptionable as
history in this particular. Poets can paint virtue in the most charming colours; but, as
they address themselves entirely to the passions, they often become advocates for
vice. Even philosophers are apt to bewilder themselves in the subtilty of their
speculations; and we have seen some go so far as to deny the reality of all moral
distinctions. But I think it a remark worthy the attention of the speculative, that the
historians have been, almost without exception, the true friends of virtue, and have
always represented it in its proper colours, however they may have erred in their
judgments of particular persons. Machiavel himself discovers a true sentiment of
virtue in his history of Florence. When he talks as a Politician, in his general
reasonings, he considers poisoning, assassination and perjury, as lawful arts of power;
but when he speaks as an Historian, in his particular narrations, he shows so keen an
indignation against vice, and so warm an approbation of virtue, in many passages, that
I could not forbear applying to him that remark of Horace, That if you chace away
nature, tho’ with ever so great indignity, she will always return upon you.3 Nor is this
combination of historians in favour of virtue at all difficult to be accounted for. When
a man of business enters into life and action, he is more apt to consider the characters
of men, as they have relation to his interest, than as they stand in themselves; and has
his judgment warped on every occasion by the violence of his passion. When a
philosopher contemplates characters and manners in his closet, the general abstract
view of the objects leaves the mind so cold and unmoved, that the sentiments of
nature have no room to play, and he scarce feels the difference between vice and
virtue. History keeps in a just medium betwixt these extremes, and places the objects
in their true point of view. The writers of history, as well as the readers, are
sufficiently interested in the characters and events, to have a lively sentiment of blame
or praise; and, at the same time, have no particular interest or concern to pervert their
judgment.
Veræ voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Eliciuntur.
Lucret.4
,
a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 308 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VII
OF AVARICE1
’Tis easy to observe, that comic writers exaggerate every character, and draw their
fop, or coward with stronger features than are any where to be met with in nature.
This moral kind of painting for the stage has been often compared to the painting for
cupolas and cielings, where the colours are over-charged, and every part is drawn
excessively large, and beyond nature. The figures seem monstrous and
disproportioned, when seen too nigh; but become natural and regular, when set at a
distance, and placed in that point of view, in which they are intended to be surveyed.
For a like reason, when characters are exhibited in theatrical representations, the want
of reality removes, in a manner, the personages; and rendering them more cold and
unentertaining, makes it necessary to compensate, by the force of colouring, what
they want in substance. Thus we find in common life, that when a man once allows
himself to depart from truth in his narrations, he never can keep within the bounds of
probability; but adds still some new circumstance to render his stories more
marvellous, and to satisfy his imagination. Two men in buckram suits became eleven
to Sir John Falstaff before the end of his story.2
There is only one vice, which may be found in life with as strong features, and as high
a colouring as needs be employed by any satyrist or comic poet; and that is Avarice.
Every day we meet with men of immense fortunes, without heirs, and on the very
brink of the grave, who refuse themselves the most common necessaries of life, and
go on heaping possessions on possessions, under all the real pressures of the severest
poverty. An old usurer, says the story, lying in his last agonies, was presented by the
priest with the crucifix to worship. He opens his eyes a moment before he expires,
considers the crucifix, and cries, These jewels are not true; I can only lend ten pistoles
upon such a pledge. This was probably the invention of some epigrammatist; and yet
every one, from his own experience, may be able to recollect almost as strong
instances of perseverance in avarice. ’Tis commonly reported of a famous miser in
this city, that finding himself near death, he sent for some of the magistrates, and gave
them a bill of an hundred pounds, payable after his decease; which sum he intended
should be disposed of in charitable uses; but scarce were they gone, when he orders
them to be called back, and offers them ready money, if they would abate five pounds
of the sum. Another noted miser in the north, intending to defraud his heirs, and leave
his fortune to the building of an hospital, protracted the drawing of his will from day
to day; and ’tis thought, that if those interested in it had not paid for the drawing it, he
had died intestate. In short, none of the most furious excesses of love and ambition are
in any respect to be compared to the extremes of avarice.
The best excuse that can be made for avarice is, that it generally prevails in old men,
or in men of cold tempers, where all the other affections are extinct; and the mind
being incapable of remaining without some passion or pursuit, at last finds out this
monstrously absurd one, which suits the coldness and inactivity of its temper. At the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 309 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
same time, it seems very extraordinary, that so frosty, spiritless a passion should be
able to carry us farther than all the warmth of youth and pleasure: but if we look more
narrowly into the matter, we shall find, that this very circumstance renders the
explication of the case more easy. When the temper is warm and full of vigour, it
naturally shoots out more ways than one, and produces inferior passions to counterbalance,
in some degree, its predominant inclination. ’Tis impossible for a person of
that temper, however bent on any pursuit, to be deprived of all sense of shame, or all
regard to the sentiments of mankind. His friends must have some influence over him:
And other considerations are apt to have their weight. All this serves to restrain him
within some bounds. But ’tis no wonder that the avaritious man, being, from the
coldness of his temper, without regard to reputation, to friendship, or to pleasure,
should be carried so far by his prevailing inclination, and should display his passion in
such surprising instances.
Accordingly we find no vice so irreclaimable as avarice: And though there scarcely
has been a moralist or philosopher, from the beginning of the world to this day, who
has not levelled a stroke at it, we hardly find a single instance of any person’s being
cured of it. For this reason, I am more apt to approve of those, who attack it with wit
and humour, than of those who treat it in a serious manner. There being so little hopes
of doing good to the people infected with this vice, I would have the rest of mankind,
at least, diverted by our manner of exposing it: As indeed there is no kind of
diversion, of which they seem so willing to partake.
Among the fables of Monsieur de laMotte,3 there is one levelled against avarice,
which seems to me more natural and easy, than most of the fables of that ingenious
author. A miser, says he, being dead, and fairly° interred, came to the banks of the
Styx, desiring to be ferried over along with the other ghosts. Charon demands his fare,
and is surprized to see the miser, rather than pay it, throw himself into the river, and
swim over to the other side, notwithstanding all the clamour and opposition that could
be made to him. All hell was in an uproar; and each of the judges was meditating
some punishment, suitable to a crime of such dangerous consequence to the infernal
revenues. Shall he be chained to the rock with Prometheus? Or tremble below the
precipice in company with the Danaides? Or assist Sisyphus in rolling his stone? No,
says Minos, none of these. We must invent some severer punishment. Let him be sent
back to the earth, to see the use his heirs are making of his riches.
I hope it will not be interpreted as a design of setting myself in opposition to this
celebrated author, if I proceed to deliver a fable of my own, which is intended to
expose the same vice of avarice. The hint of it was taken from these lines of Mr. Pope.
Damn’d to the mines, an equal fate betides
The slave that digs it, and the slave that hides.4
Our old mother Earth once lodged an indictment against Avarice before the courts of
heaven, for her wicked and malicious council and advice, in tempting, inducing,
persuading, and traiterously seducing the children of the plaintiff to commit the
detestable crime of parricide upon her, and, mangling her body, ransack her very
bowels for hidden treasure. The indictment was very long and verbose; but we must
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 310 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
omit a great part of the repetitions and synonymous terms, not to tire our readers too
much with our tale. Avarice, being called before Jupiter to answer to this charge, had
not much to say in her own defence. The injustice was clearly proved upon her. The
fact, indeed, was notorious, and the injury had been frequently repeated. When
therefore the plaintiff demanded justice, Jupiter very readily gave sentence in her
favour; and his decree was to this purpose, That since dame Avarice, the defendant,
had thus grievously injured dame Earth, the plaintiff, she was hereby ordered to take
that treasure, of which she had feloniously robbed the said plaintiff, by ransacking her
bosom, and in the same manner, as before, opening her bosom, restore it back to her,
without diminution or retention. From this sentence, it shall follow, says Jupiter to the
by-standers, That, in all future ages, the retainers of Avarice shall bury and conceal
their riches, and thereby restore to the earth what they took from her.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 311 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY VIII
A CHARACTER OF SIR ROBERT WALPOLE1
There never was a man, whose actions and character have been more earnestly and
openly canvassed, than those of the present minister, who, having governed a learned
and free nation for so long a time, amidst such mighty opposition, may make a large
library of what has been wrote for and against him, and is the subject of above half the
paper that has been blotted in the nation within these twenty years. I wish for the
honour of our country, that any one character of him had been drawn with such
judgment and impartiality, as to have some credit with posterity, and to shew, that our
liberty has, once at least, been employed to good purpose. I am only afraid, of failing
in the former quality of judgment: But if it should be so, ’tis but one page more
thrown away, after an hundred thousand, upon the same subject, that have perished,
and become useless. In the mean time, I shall flatter myself with the pleasing
imagination, that the following character will be adopted by future historians.
Sir ROBERT WALPOLE, prime minister of Great Britain, is a man of ability, not a
genius; good-natured, not virtuous; constant, not magnanimous; moderate, not
equitable;2 His virtues, in some instances, are free from the allay of those vices,
which usually accompany such virtues: He is a generous friend, without being a bitter
enemy. His vices, in other instances, are not compensated by those virtues which are
nearly allyed to them; His want of enterprise is not attended with frugality. The
private character of the man is better than the public: His virtues more than his vices:
His fortune greater than his fame. With many good qualities he has incurred the
public hatred: With good capacity he has not escaped ridicule. He would have been
esteemed more worthy of his high station had he never possessed it; and is better
qualified for the second than for the first place in any government. His ministry has
been more advantageous to his family than to the public, better for this age than for
posterity, and more pernicious by bad precedents than by real grievances. During his
time trade has flourished, liberty declined, and learning gone to ruin. As I am a man, I
love him; as I am a scholar, I hate him; as I am a Briton, I calmly wish his fall. And
were I a member of either house, I would give my vote for removing him from St.
James’s; but should be glad to see him retire to Houghton-Hall,3 to pass the
remainder of his days in ease and pleasure.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 312 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY IX
OF SUICIDE1
One considerable advantage, that arises from philosophy, consists in the sovereign
antidote, which it affords to superstition and false religion. All other remedies against
that pestilent distemper are vain, or, at least, uncertain. Plain good-sense, and the
practice of the world, which alone serve most purposes of life, are here found
ineffectual: History, as well as daily experience, affords instances of men, endowed
with the strongest capacity for business and affairs, who have all their lives crouched
under slavery to the grossest superstition. Even gaiety and sweetness of temper, which
infuse a balm into every other wound, afford no remedy to so virulent a poison; as we
may particularly observe of the fair sex, who, tho’ commonly possessed of these rich
presents of nature, feel many of their joys blasted by this importunate intruder. But
when sound philosophy has once gained possession of the mind, superstition is
effectually excluded; and one may safely affirm, that her triumph over this enemy is
more compleat than over most of the vices and imperfections, incident to human
nature. Love or anger, ambition or avarice, have their root in the temper and
affections, which the soundest reason is scarce ever able fully to correct. But
superstition, being founded on false opinion, must immediately vanish, when true
philosophy has inspired juster sentiments of superior powers. The contest is here more
equal between the distemper and the medicine: And nothing can hinder the latter from
proving effectual, but its being false and sophisticated.°
It will here be superfluous to magnify the merits of philosophy, by displaying the
pernicious tendency of that vice, of which it cures the human mind. The superstitious
man, says Tully,2 is miserable in every scene, in every incident of life. Even sleep
itself, which banishes all other cares of unhappy mortals, affords to him matter of new
terror; while he examines his dreams, and finds in those visions of the night,
prognostications of future calamities. I may add, that, tho’ death alone can put a full
period to his misery, he dares not fly to this refuge, but still prolongs a miserable
existence, from a vain fear, lest he offend his maker, by using the power, with which
that beneficent being has endowed him. The presents of God and Nature are ravished
from us by this cruel enemy; and notwithstanding that one step would remove us from
the regions of pain and sorrow, her menaces still chain us down to a hated being,
which she herself chiefly contributes to render miserable.
It is observed of such as have been reduced by the calamities of life to the necessity of
employing this fatal remedy, that, if the unseasonable care of their friends deprive
them of that species of death, which they proposed to themselves, they seldom
venture upon any other, or can summon up so much resolution, a second time, as to
execute their purpose. So great is our horror of death, that when it presents itself
under any form, besides that to which a man has endeavoured to reconcile his
imagination, it acquires new terrors, and overcomes his feeble courage. But when the
menaces of superstition are joined to this natural timidity, no wonder it quite deprives
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 313 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
men of all power over their lives; since even many pleasures and enjoyments, to
which we are carried by a strong propensity, are torn from us by this inhuman tyrant.
Let us here endeavour to restore men to their native liberty, by examining all the
common arguments against Suicide, and shewing, that That action may be free from
every imputation of guilt or blame; according to the sentiments of all the antient
philosophers.
If Suicide be criminal, it must be a transgression of our duty, either to God, our
neighbour, or ourselves.
To prove, that Suicide is no transgression of our duty to God, the following
considerations may perhaps suffice. In order to govern the material world, the
almighty creator has established general and immutable laws, by which all bodies,
from the greatest planet to the smallest particle of matter, are maintained in their
proper sphere and function. To govern the animal world, he has endowed all living
creatures with bodily and mental powers; with senses, passions, appetites, memory,
and judgment; by which they are impelled or regulated in that course of life, to which
they are destined. These two distinct principles of the material and animal world
continually encroach upon each other, and mutually retard or forward each other’s
operation. The powers of men and of all other animals are restrained and directed by
the nature and qualities of the surrounding bodies; and the modifications and actions
of these bodies are incessantly altered by the operation of all animals. Man is stopped
by rivers in his passage over the surface of the earth; and rivers, when properly
directed, lend their force to the motion of machines, which serve to the use of man.
But tho’ the provinces of the material and animal powers are not kept entirely
separate, there result from thence no discord or disorder in the creation: On the
contrary, from the mixture, union, and contrast of all the various powers of inanimate
bodies and living creatures, arises that surprizing harmony and proportion, which
affords the surest argument of supreme wisdom.
The providence of the deity appears not immediately in any operation, but governs
every thing by those general and immutable laws, which have been established from
the beginning of time. All events, in one sense, may be pronounced the action of the
almighty: They all proceed from those powers, with which he has endowed his
creatures. A house, which falls by its own weight, is not brought to ruin by his
providence more than one destroyed by the hands of men; nor are the human faculties
less his workmanship than the laws of motion and gravitation. When the passions
play, when the judgment dictates, when the limbs obey; this is all the operation of
God; and upon these animate principles, as well as upon the inanimate, has he
established the government of the universe.
Every event is alike important in the eyes of that infinite being, who takes in, at one
glance, the most distant regions of space and remotest periods of time. There is no one
event, however important to us, which he has exempted from the general laws that
govern the universe, or which he has peculiarly reserved for his own immediate action
and operation. The revolutions of states and empires depend upon the smallest caprice
or passion of single men; and the lives of men are shortened or extended by the
smallest accident of air or diet, sunshine or tempest. Nature still continues her
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 314 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
progress and operation; and if general laws be ever broke by particular volitions of the
deity, ’tis after a manner which entirely escapes human observation. As on the one
hand, the elements and other inanimate parts of the creation carry on their action
without regard to the particular interest and situation of men; so men are entrusted to
their own judgment and discretion in the various shocks of matter, and may employ
every faculty, with which they are endowed, in order to provide for their ease,
happiness, or preservation.
What is the meaning, then, of that principle, that a man, who, tired of life, and hunted
by pain and misery, bravely overcomes all the natural terrors of death, and makes his
escape from this cruel scene; that such a man, I say, has incurred the indignation of
his creator, by encroaching on the office of divine providence, and disturbing the
order of the universe? Shall we assert, that the Almighty has reserved to himself, in
any peculiar manner, the disposal of the lives of men, and has not submitted that
event, in common with others, to the general laws, by which the universe is governed?
This is plainly false. The lives of men depend upon the same laws as the lives of all
other animals; and these are subjected to the general laws of matter and motion. The
fall of a tower or the infusion of a poison will destroy a man equally with the meanest
creature: An inundation sweeps away every thing, without distinction, that comes
within the reach of its fury. Since therefore the lives of men are for ever dependent on
the general laws of matter and motion; is a man’s disposing of his life criminal,
because, in every case, it is criminal to encroach upon these laws, or disturb their
operation? But this seems absurd. All animals are entrusted to their own prudence and
skill for their conduct in the world, and have full authority, as far as their power
extends, to alter all the operations of nature. Without the exercise of this authority,
they could not subsist a moment. Every action, every motion of a man innovates in
the order of some parts of matter, and diverts, from their ordinary course, the general
laws of motion. Putting together, therefore, these conclusions, we find, that human
life depends upon the general laws of matter and motion, and that ’tis no
encroachment on the office of providence to disturb or alter these general laws. Has
not every one, of consequence, the free disposal of his own life? And may he not
lawfully employ that power with which nature has endowed him?
In order to destroy the evidence of this conclusion, we must shew a reason, why this
particular case is excepted. Is it because human life is of so great importance, that it is
a presumption for human prudence to dispose of it? But the life of man is of no
greater importance to the universe than that of an oyster. And were it of ever so great
importance, the order of nature has actually submitted it to human prudence, and
reduced us to a necessity, in every incident, of determining concerning it.
Were the disposal of human life so much reserved as the peculiar province of the
almighty that it were an encroachment on his right for men to dispose of their own
lives; it would be equally criminal to act for the preservation of life as for its
destruction. If I turn aside a stone, which is falling upon my head, I disturb the course
of nature, and I invade the peculiar province of the almighty, by lengthening out my
life, beyond the period, which, by the general laws of matter and motion, he had
assigned to it.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 315 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
A hair, a fly, an insect is able to destroy this mighty being, whose life is of such
importance. Is it an absurdity to suppose, that human prudence may lawfully dispose
of what depends on such insignificant causes?
It would be no crime in me to divert the Nile or Danube from its course, were I able to
effect such purposes. Where then is the crime of turning a few ounces of blood from
their natural chanels!
Do you imagine that I repine at providence or curse my creation, because I go out of
life, and put a period to a being, which, were it to continue, would render me
miserable? Far be such sentiments from me. I am only convinced of a matter of fact,
which you yourself acknowledge possible, that human life may be unhappy, and that
my existence, if farther prolonged, would become uneligible. But I thank providence,
both for the good, which I have already enjoyed, and for the power, with which I am
endowed, of escaping the ill that threatens me.3 To you it belongs to repine at
providence, who foolishly imagine that you have no such power, and who must still
prolong a hated being, tho’ loaded with pain and sickness, with shame and poverty.
Do you not teach, that when any ill befalls me, tho’ by the malice of my enemies, I
ought to be resigned to providence; and that the actions of men are the operations of
the almighty as much as the actions of inanimate beings? When I fall upon my own
sword, therefore, I receive my death equally from the hands of the deity, as if it had
proceeded from a lion, a precipice, or a fever.
The submission, which you require to providence, in every calamity, that befalls me,
excludes not human skill and industry; if possibly, by their means, I can avoid or
escape the calamity. And why may I not employ one remedy as well as another?
If my life be not my own, it were criminal for me to put it in danger, as well as to
dispose of it: Nor could one man deserve the appellation of Hero, whom glory or
friendship transports into the greatest dangers, and another merit the reproach of
Wretch or Miscreant, who puts a period to his life, from the same or like motives.
There is no being, which possesses any power or faculty, that it receives not from its
creator; nor is there any one, which, by ever so irregular an action, can encroach upon
the plan of his providence, or disorder the universe. Its operations are his work
equally with that chain of events, which it invades; and which ever principle prevails,
we may, for that very reason, conclude it to be most favoured by him. Be it animate or
inanimate, rational or irrational, ’tis all a case: It’s power is still derived from the
supreme creator, and is alike comprehended in the order of his providence. When the
horror of pain prevails over the love of life: When a voluntary action anticipates the
effect of blind causes; it is only in consequence of those powers and principles, which
he has implanted in his creatures. Divine providence is still inviolate, and placed far
beyond the reach of human injuries.
It is impious, says the old Roman superstition,4 to divert rivers from their course, or
invade the prerogatives of nature. ’Tis impious, says the French superstition, to
inoculate for the small-pox, or usurp the business of providence, by voluntarily
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 316 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
producing distempers and maladies. ’Tis impious, says the modern European
superstition, to put a period to our own life, and thereby rebel against our creator. And
why not impious, say I, to build houses, cultivate the ground, and sail upon the ocean?
In all these actions, we employ our powers of mind and body to produce some
innovation in the course of nature; and in none of them do we any more. They are all
of them, therefore, equally innocent or equally criminal.
But you are placed by providence, like a sentinel, in a particular station; and when
you desert it, without being recalled, you are guilty of rebellion against your almighty
sovereign, and have incurred his displeasure. I ask, why do you conclude, that
Providence has placed me in this station? For my part, I find, that I owe my birth to a
long chain of causes, of which many and even the principal, depended upon voluntary
actions of men. But Providence guided all these causes, and nothing happens in the
universe without its consent and co-operation. If so, then neither does my death,
however voluntary, happen without it’s consent; and whenever pain and sorrow so far
overcome my patience as to make me tired of life, I may conclude, that I am recalled
from my station, in the clearest and most express terms.
It is providence, surely, that has placed me at present in this chamber: But may I not
leave it, when I think proper, without being liable to the imputation of having deserted
my post or station? When I shall be dead, the principles, of which I am composed,
will still perform their part in the universe, and will be equally useful in the grand
fabric, as when they composed this individual creature. The difference to the whole
will be no greater than between my being in a chamber and in the open air. The one
change is of more importance to me than the other; but not more so to the universe.
It is a kind of blasphemy to imagine, that any created being can disturb the order of
the world, or invade the business of providence. It supposes, that that being possesses
powers and faculties, which it received not from its creator, and which are not
subordinate to his government and authority. A man may disturb society, no doubt;
and thereby incur the displeasure of the almighty: But the government of the world is
placed far beyond his reach and violence. And how does it appear, that the almighty is
displeased with those actions, that disturb society? By the principles which he has
implanted in human nature, and which inspire us with a sentiment of remorse, if we
ourselves have been guilty of such actions, and with that of blame and disapprobation,
if we ever observe them in others. Let us now examine, according to the method
proposed, whether Suicide be of this kind of actions, and be a breach of our duty to
our neighbour and to society.
A man, who retires from life, does no harm to society. He only ceases to do good;
which, if it be an injury, is of the lowest kind.
All our obligations to do good to society seem to imply something reciprocal. I
receive the benefits of society, and therefore ought to promote it’s interest. But when I
withdraw myself altogether from society, can I be bound any longer?
But allowing, that our obligations to do good were perpetual, they have certainly
some bounds. I am not obliged to do a small good to society, at the expence of a great
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 317 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
harm to myself. Why then should I prolong a miserable existence, because of some
frivolous advantage, which the public may, perhaps, receive from me? If upon
account of age and infirmities, I may lawfully resign any office, and employ my time
altogether in fencing against these calamities, and alleviating, as much as possible, the
miseries of my future life: Why may I not cut short these miseries at once by an
action, which is no more prejudicial to society?
But suppose, that it is no longer in my power to promote the interest of the public:
Suppose, that I am a burthen to it: Suppose, that my life hinders some person from
being much more useful to the public. In such cases my resignation of life must not
only be innocent but laudable. And most people, who lie under any temptation to
abandon existence, are in some such situation. Those, who have health, or power, or
authority, have commonly better reason to be in humour with the world.
A man is engaged in a conspiracy for the public interest; is seized upon suspicion; is
threatened with the rack; and knows, from his own weakness, that the secret will be
extorted from him: Could such a one consult the public interest better than by putting
a quick period to a miserable life? This was the case of the famous and brave Strozzi
of Florence.5
Again, suppose a malefactor justly condemned to a shameful death; can any reason be
imagined, why he may not anticipate his punishment, and save himself all the anguish
of thinking on its dreadful approaches? He invades the business of providence no
more than the magistrate did, who ordered his execution; and his voluntary death is
equally advantageous to society, by ridding it of a pernicious member.
That Suicide may often be consistent with interest and with our duty to ourselves, no
one can question, who allows, that age, sickness, or misfortune may render life a
burthen, and make it worse even than annihilation. I believe that no man ever threw
away life, while it was worth keeping. For such is our natural horror of death, that
small motives will never be able to reconcile us to it. And tho’ perhaps the situation of
a man’s health or fortune did not seem to require this remedy, we may at least be
assured, that any one, who, without apparent reason, has had recourse to it, was curst
with such an incurable depravity or gloominess of temper, as must poison all
enjoyment, and render him equally miserable as if he had been loaded with the most
grievous misfortunes.
If Suicide be supposed a crime, ’tis only cowardice can impel us to it. If it be no
crime, both prudence and courage should engage us to rid ourselves at once of
existence, when it becomes a burthen. ’Tis the only way, that we can then be useful to
society, by setting an example, which, if imitated, would preserve to every one his
chance for happiness in life, and would effectually free him from all danger of
misery.6
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 318 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
ESSAY X
OF THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL1
By the mere light of reason it seems difficult to prove the Immortality of the Soul.
The arguments for it are commonly derived either from metaphysical topics, or moral
or physical. But in reality, it is the gospel, and the gospel alone, that has brought life
and immortality to light.
I. Metaphysical topics are founded on the supposition that the soul is immaterial, and
that it is impossible for thought to belong to a material substance.
But just metaphysics teach us, that the notion of substance is wholly confused and
imperfect, and that we have no other idea of any substance than as an aggregate of
particular qualities, inhering in an unknown something. Matter, therefore, and spirit
are at bottom equally unknown; and we cannot determine what qualities may inhere in
the one or in the other.
They likewise teach us, that nothing can be decided a priori concerning any cause or
effect; and that experience being the only source of our judgments of this nature, we
cannot know from any other principle, whether matter, by its structure or
arrangement, may not be the cause of thought. Abstract reasonings cannot decide any
question of fact or existence.2
But admitting a spiritual substance to be dispersed throughout the universe, like the
etherial fire of the Stoics, and to be the only inherent subject of thought; we have
reason to conclude from analogy, that nature uses it after the same manner she does
the other substance, matter. She employs it as a kind of paste or clay; modifies it into
a variety of forms and existences; dissolves after a time each modification; and from
it’s substance erects a new form. As the same material substance may successively
compose the body of all animals, the same spiritual substance may compose their
minds: Their consciousness, or that system of thought, which they formed during life,
may be continually dissolved by death; and nothing interest them in the new
modification. The most positive asserters of the mortality of the soul, never denied the
immortality of its substance. And that an immaterial substance, as well as a material,
may lose its memory or consciousness appears, in part, from experience, if the soul be
immaterial.
Reasoning from the common course of nature, and without supposing any new
interposition of the supreme cause, which ought always to be excluded from
philosophy; what is incorruptible must also be ingenerable. The soul, therefore, if
immortal, existed before our birth: And if the former state of existence no wise
concerned us, neither will the latter.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 319 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Animals undoubtedly feel, think, love, hate, will, and even reason, tho’ in a more
imperfect manner than man. Are their souls also immaterial and immortal?
II. Let us now consider the moral arguments, chiefly those arguments derived from
the justice of God, which is supposed to be farther interested in the farther punishment
of the vicious, and reward of the virtuous.
But these arguments are grounded on the supposition, that God has attributes beyond
what he has exerted in this universe, with which alone we are acquainted. Whence do
we infer the existence of these attributes?
It is very safe for us to affirm, that, whatever we know the deity to have actually done,
is best; but it is very dangerous to affirm, that he must always do what to us seems
best. In how many instances would this reasoning fail us with regard to the present
world?
But if any purpose of nature be clear, we may affirm, that the whole scope and
intention of man’s creation, so far as we can judge by natural reason, is limited to the
present life. With how weak a concern, from the original, inherent structure of the
mind and passions, does he ever look farther? What comparison, either for steddiness
or efficacy, between so floating an idea, and the most doubtful persuasion of any
matter of fact, that occurs in common life.
There arise, indeed, in some minds, some unaccountable terrors with regard to
futurity: But these would quickly vanish, were they not artificially fostered by precept
and education. And those, who foster them; what is their motive? Only to gain a
livelihood, and to acquire power and riches in this world. Their very zeal and
industry, therefore, are an argument against them.
What cruelty, what iniquity, what injustice in nature, to confine thus all our concern,
as well as all our knowledge, to the present life, if there be another scene still awaiting
us, of infinitely greater consequence? Ought this barbarous deceit to be ascribed to a
beneficent and wise being?
Observe with what exact proportion the task to be performed and the performing
powers are adjusted throughout all nature. If the reason of man gives him a great
superiority above other animals, his necessities are proportionably multiplied upon
him. His whole time, his whole capacity, activity, courage, passion, find sufficient
employment, in fencing against the miseries of his present condition. And frequently,
nay almost always, are too slender for the business assigned them.
A pair of shoes, perhaps, was never yet wrought to the highest degree of perfection,
which that commodity is capable of attaining. Yet is it necessary, at least very useful,
that there should be some politicians and moralists, even some geometers, historians,
poets, and philosophers among mankind.
The powers of men are no more superior to their wants, considered merely in this life,
than those of foxes and hares are, compared to their wants and to their period of
existence. The inference from parity of reason is therefore obvious.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 320 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
On the theory of the soul’s mortality, the inferiority of women’s capacity is easily
accounted for: Their domestic life requires no higher faculties either of mind or body.
This circumstance vanishes and becomes absolutely insignificant, on the religious
theory: The one sex has an equal task to perform with the other: Their powers of
reason and resolution ought also to have been equal, and both of them infinitely
greater than at present.
As every effect implies a cause, and that another, till we reach the first cause of all,
which is the Deity; every thing, that happens, is ordained by him; and nothing can be
the object of his punishment or vengeance.
By what rule are punishments and rewards distributed? What is the divine standard of
merit and demerit? Shall we suppose, that human sentiments have place in the deity?
However bold that hypothesis, we have no conception of any other sentiments.
According to human sentiments, sense, courage, good manners, industry, prudence,
genius, &c. are essential parts of personal merit. Shall we therefore erect an elysium
for poets and heroes, like that of the antient mythology?3 Why confine all rewards to
one species of virtue?
Punishment, without any proper end or purpose, is inconsistent with our ideas of
goodness and justice; and no end can be served by it after the whole scene is closed.
Punishment, according to our conceptions, should bear some proportion to the
offence. Why then eternal punishment for the temporary offences of so frail a creature
as man? Can any one approve of Alexander’s rage, who intended to exterminate a
whole nation, because they had seized his favourite horse, Bucephalus?4
Heaven and hell suppose two distinct species of men, the good and the bad. But the
greatest part of mankind float between vice and virtue.
Were one to go round the world with an intention of giving a good supper to the
righteous and a sound drubbing to the wicked, he would frequently be embarrassed in
his choice, and would find, that the merits and demerits of most men and women
scarcely amount to the value of either.
To suppose measures of approbation and blame, different from the human, confounds
every thing. Whence do we learn, that there is such a thing as moral distinctions but
from our own sentiments?
What man, who has not met with personal provocation (or what good natur’d man
who has) could inflict on crimes, from the sense of blame alone, even the common,
legal, frivolous punishments? And does any thing steel the breast of judges and juries
against the sentiments of humanity but reflections on necessity and public interest?
By the Roman law, those who had been guilty of parricide and confessed their crime,
were put into a sack, along with an ape, a dog, and a serpent; and thrown into the
river: Death alone was the punishment of those, who denied their guilt, however fully
proved. A criminal was tryed before Augustus, and condemned after full conviction:
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 321 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
But the humane emperor, when he put the last interrogatory, gave it such a turn as to
lead the wretch into a denial of his guilt. You surely, said the prince, did not kill your
father.5 This lenity suits our natural ideas of RIGHT, even towards the greatest of all
criminals, and even tho’ it prevents so inconsiderable a sufferance. Nay, even the
most bigotted priest would naturally, without reflection, approve of it; provided the
crime was not heresy or infidelity. For as these crimes hurt himself in his temporal
interests and advantages; perhaps he may not be altogether so indulgent to them.
The chief source of moral ideas is the reflection on the interests of human society.
Ought these interests, so short, so frivolous, to be guarded by punishments, eternal
and infinite? The damnation of one man is an infinitely greater evil in the universe,
than the subversion of a thousand million of kingdoms.
Nature has rendered human infancy peculiarly frail and mortal; as it were on purpose
to refute the notion of a probationary state. The half of mankind dye before they are
rational creatures.
III. The physical arguments from the analogy of nature are strong for the mortality of
the soul; and these are really the only philosophical arguments, which ought to be
admitted with regard to this question, or indeed any question of fact.
Where any two objects are so closely connected, that all alterations, which we have
ever seen in the one, are attended with proportionable alterations in the other; we
ought to conclude, by all rules of analogy, that, when there are still greater alterations
produced in the former, and it is totally dissolved, there follows a total dissolution of
the latter.
Sleep, a very small effect on the body, is attended with a temporary extinction; at
least, a great confusion in the soul.
The weakness of the body and that of the mind in infancy are exactly proportioned;
their vigor in manhood; their sympathetic disorder in sickness; their common gradual
decay in old age. The step farther seems unavoidable; their common dissolution in
death.
The last symptoms, which the mind discovers, are disorder, weakness, insensibility,
stupidity, the forerunners of its annihilation. The farther progress of the same causes,
encreasing the same effects, totally extinguish it.
Judging by the usual analogy of nature, no form can continue, when transferred to a
condition of life very different from the original one, in which it was placed. Trees
perish in the water; fishes in the air; animals in the earth. Even so small a difference
as that of climate is often fatal. What reason then to imagine, that an immense
alteration, such as is made on the soul by the dissolution of its body and all its organs
of thought and sensation, can be effected without the dissolution of the whole?
Every thing is in common between soul and body. The organs of the one are all of
them the organs of the other. The existence therefore of the one must be dependent on
that of the other.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 322 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The souls of animals are allowed to be mortal; and these bear so near a resemblance to
the souls of men, that the analogy from one to the other forms a very strong argument.
Their bodies are not more resembling; yet no one rejects the arguments drawn from
comparative anatomy. The Metempsychosis is therefore the only system of this kind,
that philosophy can so much as hearken to.6
Nothing in this world is perpetual. Every being, however seemingly firm, is in
continual flux and change: The world itself gives symptoms of frailty and dissolution:
How contrary to analogy, therefore, to imagine, that one single form, seemingly the
frailest of any, and from the slightest causes, subject, to the greatest disorders, is
immortal and indissoluble? What a daring theory is that! How lightly, not to say, how
rashly entertained!
How to dispose of the infinite number of posthumous existences ought also to
embarrass the religious theory. Every planet, in every solar system, we are at liberty
to imagine peopled with intelligent, mortal beings: At least, we can fix on no other
supposition. For these, then, a new universe must, every generation, be created,
beyond the bounds of the present universe; or one must have been created at first so
prodigiously wide as to admit of this continual influx of beings. Ought such bold
suppositions to be received by any philosophy; and that merely on pretence of a bare
possibility?
When it is asked, whether Agamemnon, Thersites, Hannibal, Nero, and every stupid
clown, that ever existed in Italy, Scythia, Bactria, or Guinea, are now alive; can any
man think, that a scrutiny of nature will furnish arguments strong enough to answer so
strange a question in the affirmative? The want of arguments, without revelation,
sufficiently establishes the negative.
Quanto facilius, says Pliny,7certiusque sibi quemque credere, ac specimen securitatis
antigenitali sumere experimento. Our insensibility, before the composition of the
body, seems to natural reason a proof of a like state after its dissolution.
Were our horror of annihilation an original passion, not the effect of our general love
of happiness, it would rather prove the mortality of the soul. For as nature does
nothing in vain, she would never give us a horror against an impossible event. She
may give us a horror against an unavoidable event, provided our endeavours, as in the
present case, may often remove it to some distance. Death is in the end unavoidable;
yet the human species could not be preserved, had not nature inspired us with an
aversion towards it.
All doctrines are to be suspected, which are favoured by our passions. And the hopes
and fears which give rise to this doctrine, are very obvious.
It is an infinite advantage in every controversy, to defend the negative. If the question
be out of the common experienced course of nature, this circumstance is almost, if not
altogether, decisive. By what arguments or analogies can we prove any state of
existence, which no one ever saw, and which no wise resembles any that ever was
seen? Who will repose such trust in any pretended philosophy, as to admit upon its
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 323 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
testimony the reality of so marvellous a scene? Some new species of logic is requisite
for that purpose; and some new faculties of the mind, which may enable us to
comprehend that logic.
Nothing could set in a fuller light the infinite obligations, which mankind have to
divine revelation; since we find, that no other medium could ascertain this great and
important truth.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 324 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
VARIANT READINGS
Hume revised his essays continually throughout his lifetime, and there are many
significant differences between earlier editions of the essays and the 1777 edition,
which was corrected by Hume shortly before his death. The principal variations of
earlier editions are recorded by T. H. Green and T. H. Grose in their edition of the
Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary (1874, and after). The variations printed below
are taken from Green and Grose, New Edition (London: Longmans, Green, and Co.,
1889). The reader should keep in mind that Green and Grose do not consider all
relevant editions of the essays and that their listing of variants is deficient in other
ways as well. Also, editions E, F, and G are not part of the genealogy of the Essays,
Moral, Political, and Literary. Superscript letters in the present text indicate where
the variations occur. Green and Grose identify the editions of Hume’s essays by letter,
as follows:
Edition
A Essays, Moral and Political. Edinburgh, 1741.
B Essays, Moral and Political. Second edition, corrected, Edinburgh, 1742.
C Essays, Moral and Political. Vol. 2. Edinburgh, 1742.
D
Essays, Moral and Political. Third edition, corrected with additions; London and
Edinburgh, 1748.
E Philosophical Essays concerning Human Understanding. London, 1748.
F
Philosophical Essays concerning Human Understanding. Second edition, with
additions and corrections; London, 1751.
G An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. London, 1751.
H Political Discourses. Edinburgh, 1752.
I Political Discourses. Second edition; Edinburgh, 1752.
K
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London and Edinburgh, 1753–54. Four
volumes.
L Four Dissertations. London, 1757.
M
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London and Edinburgh, 1758. One
volume.
N
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London and Edinburgh, 1760. Four
volumes.
O
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London and Edinburgh, 1764. Two
volumes.
P
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. Edinburgh and London, 1768. Two
volumes.
Q
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London and Edinburgh, 1770. Four
volumes.
R
Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. London and Edinburgh, 1777. Two
volumes.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 325 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Back to Table of Contents]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 326 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
VARIANT READINGS TO PART I
PART TITLE PAGE
I.
OF THE DELICACY OF TASTE AND PASSION
II.
OF THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS
III.
THAT POLITICS MAY BE REDUCED TO A SCIENCE
IV.
OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT
VI.
OF THE INDEPENDENCY OF PARLIAMENT
VII.
WHETHER THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT INCLINES
MORE TO ABSOLUTE MONARCHY, OR TO A REPUBLIC
VIII.
OF PARTIES IN GENERAL
IX.
OF THE PARTIES OF GREAT BRITAIN
X.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 327 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
OF SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM
XI.
OF THE DIGNITY OR MEANNESS OF HUMAN NATURE
XII.
OF CIVIL LIBERTY
XIII.
OF ELOQUENCE
XIV.
OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE ARTS AND
SCIENCES
XV.
THE EPICUREAN
XVIII.
THE SCEPTIC
XIX.
OF POLYGAMY AND DIVORCES
XX.
OF SIMPLICITY AND REFINEMENT IN WRITING
XXI.
OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 328 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
VARIANT READINGS TO PART II
TITLE PAGE
I.
OF COMMERCE
II.
OF REFINEMENT IN THE ARTS
III.
OF MONEY
IV.
OF INTEREST
V.
OF THE BALANCE OF TRADE
VII.
OF THE BALANCE OF POWER
VIII.
OF TAXES
IX.
OF PUBLIC CREDIT
X.
OF SOME REMARKABLE CUSTOMS
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 329 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
XI.
OF THE POPULOUSNESS OF ANCIENT NATIONS
XII.
OF THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT
XIII.
OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE
XIV.
OF THE COALITION OF PARTIES
XV.
OF THE PROTESTANT SUCCESSION
XVI.
IDEA OF A PERFECT COMMONWEALTH
VARIANT READINGS TO ESSAYS WITHDRAWN AND
UNPUBLISHED
IV.
OF IMPUDENCE AND MODESTY
VI.
OF THE STUDY OF HISTORY
GLOSSARY
Page 4
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 330 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 6
Page 7
Page 8
Page 9
Page 10
Page 11
Page 12
Page 15
Page 16
Page 17
Page 18
Page 20
Page 21
Page 26
Page 27
Page 28
Page 30
Page 31
Page 32
Page 33
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 331 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 34
Page 38
Page 39
Page 40
Page 41
Page 43
Page 47
Page 48
Page 49
Page 50
Page 51
Page 52
Page 53
Page 55
Page 58
Page 60
Page 61
Page 62
Page 64
Page 70
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 332 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 73
Page 74
Page 75
Page 76
Page 77
Page 78
Page 79
Page 80
Page 81
Page 85
Page 86
Page 92
Page 93
Page 95
Page 103
Page 104
Page 105
Page 107
Page 108
Page 109
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 333 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 111
Page 115
Page 116
Page 119
Page 124
Page 125
Page 130
Page 133
Page 134
Page 138
Page 139
Page 140
Page 141
Page 142
Page 143
Page 144
Page 145
Page 146
Page 147
Page 149
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 334 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 151
Page 157
Pages 160–1
Page 161
Page 163
Page 170
Page 173
Page 175
Page 176
Page 178
Page 180
Page 183
Page 185
Page 187
Page 188
Page 189
Page 191
Page 192
Page 193
Page 194
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 335 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 196
Page 197
Page 198
Page 202
Page 204
Page 206
Page 209
Page 213
Page 215
Page 220
Page 222
Page 224
Page 226
Page 227
Page 231
Page 238
Page 240
Page 244
Page 245
Page 246
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 336 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 247
Page 257
Page 259
Page 261
Page 262
Page 265
Page 266
Page 267
Page 269
Page 270
Page 271
Page 272
Page 273
Page 274
Page 276
Page 284
Page 287
Page 290
Page 292
Page 297
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 337 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 298
Page 308
Page 311
Page 313
Page 314
Page 317
Page 319
Page 329
Page 330
Page 332
Page 335
Page 337
Page 340
Page 341
Page 353
Page 357
Page 358
Page 360
Page 362
Page 363
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 338 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 367
Page 369
Page 381
Page 412
Page 463
Page 474
Page 494
Page 500
Page 503
Page 505
Page 506
Page 507
Page 508
Page 510
Page 517
Page 519
Page 521
Page 522
Page 534
Page 537
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 339 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Page 543
Page 544
Page 554
Page 557
Page 565
Page 567
Page 572
Page 579
This book was set in Caslon 540, a typeface derived from the design of William
Caslon, the great pioneer of English typefounding. Caslon was born in 1692 and
apprenticed as a boy to a London engraver. Both the roman and italic versions of this
famous typeface first appeared in 1722. Since that time it has never gone out of style,
although it has been recut and modified many times for more-modern typesetting
systems.
Printed on paper that is acid-free and meets the requirements of the American
National Standard for Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials,
Z39.48-1992. (archival)
Editorial services by Harkavy Publishing Service, New York, New York
Book design by Betty Binns Graphics, New York, New York
Frontispiece photo printed by Hilltop Press, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Typography by Typoservice Corporation, Indianapolis, Indiana
Printed and bound by Edwards Brothers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan
[1. ]An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding appeared for the first time under
this title in the 1758 edition of Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. Earlier it had
been published several times, beginning in 1748, under the title Philosophical Essays
Concerning Human Understanding. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals
was first published in 1751. I have drawn this and other information about the various
editions of Hume’s writings from two sources: T. E. Jessop, A Bibliography of David
Hume and of Scottish Philosophy (New York: Russell and Russell, 1966), and
William B. Todd, “David Hume. A Preliminary Bibliography,” in Todd, ed., Hume
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 340 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and the Enlightenment (Edinburgh and Austin: Edinburgh University Press and the
Humanities Research Center, Austin, Texas, 1974), pp. 189–205.
[2. ]Books I and II of the Treatise were published in 1739; Book III, in 1740.
[3. ]Hume wrote the Dialogues about 1750 but decided to withhold publication during
his lifetime. When Adam Smith proved unwilling to take responsibility for the
posthumous publication of the Dialogues, Hume entrusted it to his own publisher,
William Strahan, with the provision that the work would be committed to Hume’s
nephew David if Strahan failed to publish it within two and one-half years of Hume’s
death. When Strahan declined to act, the nephew made arrangements for the
publication of the Dialogues in 1779.
[4. ]Hume’s History was published between 1754 and 1762 in six volumes, beginning
with the Stuart reigns, then working back to the Tudor and pre-Tudor epochs. A “New
Edition, Corrected,” with the six volumes arranged in chronological order, appeared
in 1762 under the title The History of England, From the Invasion of Julius Caesar to
The Revolution in 1688.
[5. ]This edition contained the following essays: (1) “Of the Delicacy of Taste and
Passion”; (2) “Of the Liberty of the Press”; (3) “Of Impudence and Modesty”; (4)
“That Politicks may be reduc’d to a Science”; (5) “Of the First Principles of
Government”; (6) “Of Love and Marriage”; (7) “Of the Study of History”; (8) “Of the
Independency of Parliament”; (9) “Whether the British Government inclines more to
Absolute Monarchy, or to a Republick”; (10) “Of Parties in General”; (11) “Of the
Parties of Great Britain”; (12) “Of Superstition and Enthusiasm”; (13) “Of Avarice”;
(14) “Of the Dignity of Human Nature”; and (15) “Of Liberty and Despotism.” Essays
3, 6, and 7 were not reprinted by Hume after 1760, and essay 13 was not reprinted
after 1768. The title of essay 14 was changed to “Of the Dignity or Meanness of
Human Nature” in the 1770 edition of Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. The
title of essay 15 was changed to “Of Civil Liberty” in the 1758 edition of Essays and
Treatises.
[6. ]This edition contained the following essays: (1) “Of Essay-Writing”; (2) “Of
Eloquence”; (3) “Of Moral Prejudices”; (4) “Of the Middle Station of Life”; (5) “Of
the Rise and Progress of the Arts and Sciences”; (6) “The Epicurean”; (7) “The
Stoic”; (8) “The Platonist”; (9) “The Sceptic”; (10) “Of Polygamy and Divorces”;
(11) “Of Simplicity and Refinement”; and (12) “A Character of Sir Robert Walpole.”
Essays 1, 3, and 4 were published by Hume in this edition only. Essay 12 was printed
as a footnote to “That Politics may be reduced to a Science” in editions from 1748 to
1768 and dropped after 1768.
[7. ]This edition, entitled Three Essays, Moral and Political, contained: (1) “Of
National Characters”; (2) “Of the Original Contract”; and (3) “Of Passive
Obedience.”
[8. ]This edition contained the following essays: (1) “Of Commerce”; (2) “Of
Luxury”; (3) “Of Money”; (4) “Of Interest”; (5) “Of the Balance of Trade”; (6) “Of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 341 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the Balance of Power”; (7) “Of Taxes”; (8) “Of Public Credit”; (9) “Of some
Remarkable Customs”; (10) “Of the Populousness of Antient Nations”; (11) “Of the
Protestant Succession”; and (12) “Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth.” The title of
essay 2 was changed in 1760 to “Of Refinement in the Arts.”
[9. ]The 1758 edition of Essays and Treatises incorporated, from a 1757 work entitled
Four Dissertations, the essays “Of Tragedy” and “Of the Standard of Taste” as well
as two other works, The Natural History of Religion and A Dissertation on the
Passions. Two new essays, “Of the Jealousy of Trade” and “Of the Coalition of
Parties,” were added late to some copies of the 1758 edition of Essays and Treatises,
then incorporated into the edition of 1760. Finally, Hume prepared still another essay,
“Of the Origin of Government,” for the edition that would be published posthumously
in 1777.
[10. ]See, in Smith’s letter to William Strahan in the present edition, p. xlvi.
[11. ]Reprinted in the present edition, pp. xxxi–xli.
[12. ]See A Bibliography of David Hume and of Scottish Philosophy, pp. 7–8.
[13. ]See John B. Stewart, The Moral and Political Philosophy of David Hume (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1963); F. A. Hayek, “The Legal and Political
Philosophy of David Hume,” in V. C. Chappell, ed., Hume: A Collection of Critical
Essays (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1966), pp. 335–60; Duncan Forbes, Hume’s
Philosophical Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975); David Miller,
Philosophy and Ideology in Hume’s Political Thought (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1981); and Donald W. Livingston, Hume’s Philosophy of Common Life (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1984).
[14. ]See, for example, Essential Works of David Hume, ed. Ralph Cohen (New York:
Bantam Books, 1965); Of the Standard of Taste, And Other Essays, ed. John W. Lenz
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965); Writings on Economics, ed. Eugene Rotwein
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1955); Political Essays, ed. Charles W.
Hendel (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1953); Theory of Politics, ed. Frederick M.
Watkins (Edinburgh: Nelson, 1951); and Hume’s Moral and Political Philosophy, ed.
Henry D. Aiken (New York: Hafner, 1948).
[15. ]London: Oxford University Press, 1963.
[16. ]Volumes 1 and 2, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1983; Volumes 3 and 4, 1984;
Volumes 5 and 6 in preparation. This edition has a Foreword by William B. Todd.
[17. ]John Home, A Sketch of the character of Mr. Hume and Diary of a Journey from
Morpeth to Bath, 23 April–1 May 1776, ed. David Fate Norton (Edinburgh: Tragara
Press, 1976), p. 8.
[18. ]T. H. Grose, in prefatory remarks to Hume’s Essays, Moral, Political, and
Literary, admits to being struck by “the suddenness with which his labours in
philosophy came to an end” with the publication of the Treatise (see “History of the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 342 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Editions,” in The Philosophical Works of David Hume, ed. T. H. Green and T. H.
Grose [New Edition; London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1889], 3.75). Grose
maintains that Hume “certainly lacked the disposition, and probably the ability,” for
constructive philosophy, once the critical or negative task of the Treatise was
completed (ibid., p. 76). Though contrary to what Hume himself says about his
mature writings as well as to what other interpreters have said about his abilities, this
view was a rather common one at the turn of the century. It helped gain for Hume’s
Treatise the attention that it deserves, but at the same time it discouraged the study of
Hume’s other writings, particularly the Essays, as proper sources for his philosophy.
[1. ]A few years ago, Roland Hall observed: “Hume’s Essays, Moral, Political, and
Literary have not been properly edited, and the best text may still be that in the Green
and Grose Philosophical Works.” See Fifty Years of Hume Scholarship: A
Bibliographical Guide (Edinburgh: University Press, 1978), p. 5.
[2. ]Peter H. Nidditch writes: “In my view, a suitable and attainable standard of
accuracy in the text (from printed materials) offered by an editor working singlehanded
is an average in his first edition of two brief miswordings and of six erroneous
forms per forty thousand words of the text; in the first reprint taking account of his
rechecking (which is a pressing duty), these allowances should be halved. This is the
standard I have adopted as the General Editor of The Clarendon Edition of the Works
of John Locke (Oxford, 1975, in progress).” See An Apparatus of Variant Readings
for Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature (Department of Philosophy, University of
Sheffield, 1976), p. 34.
[3. ]In the 1777 edition of Hume’s Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects, proper
names and adjectives derived therefrom (e.g., “British,” “French”) are printed entirely
in capital letters, with the first letter being larger than the rest. Abstract nouns are
sometimes printed the same way for emphasis or to indicate divisions in the argument
(e.g., “Force,” “Power,” and “Property” in “Of the First Principles of Government”;
“Authority” and “Liberty” in “Of the Origin of Government”). Occasionally,
however, words are printed entirely in large capital letters (“GOD”) or entirely in
small capitals (e.g., “interest” and “iight” in “Of the First Principles of Government”).
It is uncertain to what extent this reflects Hume’s manuscript practice, as
distinguished from contemporary book trade convention, but in any event, Hume did
have the opportunity to correct what finally went into print. Since these peculiarities
of capitalization may be relevant to the interpretation of the text, they have been
preserved in the present edition.
[4. ]The Introduction and Appendix to Nidditch’s edition of Locke’s Essay provide a
very helpful discussion of the techniques and terminology of critical-text editing.
Nidditch’s editorial work on some of Hume’s most important writings is also
noteworthy. He has revised the texts and added notes to the standard Selby-Bigge
editions of the Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding, and Concerning the
Principles of Morals, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), and the Treatise of
Human Nature, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978). Nidditch discusses the
problems of editing Hume as well as the merits of various editions of Hume’s writings
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 343 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
in the aforementioned texts as well as in An Apparatus of Variant Readings for
Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature.
[5. ]In “Notes” to Hume’s Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding, and
Concerning the Principles of Morals, p. 348.
[1. ][This autobiography and the accompanying letter from Adam Smith to William
Strahan were published in March, 1777, as The Life of David Hume, Esq. Written by
Himself (London: Printed for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell, in the Strand). At the time
the autobiography was written, the disorder that would take Hume’s life on August
25, 1776, was already well advanced. To Adam Smith, who had been entrusted with
his manuscripts, Hume wrote on May 3: “You will find among my Papers a very
inoffensive Piece, called My own Life, which I composed a few days before I left
Edinburgh, when I thought, as did all my Friends, that my life was despaired of. There
can be no Objection, that this small piece should be sent to Messrs Strahan and Cadell
and the Proprietors of my other Works to be prefixed to any future Edition of them”
(in J. Y. T. Greig, The Letters of David Hume [Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1932],
2:318). Concerned lest Smith delay the publication of this and other manuscripts,
Hume added a codicil to his will, dated August 7, leaving all of his manuscripts to
Strahan and giving specific directions as to their publication. Regarding My own Life,
he wrote: “My Account of my own Life, I desire may be prefixed to the first Edition
of my Works, printed after my Death, which will probably be the one at present in the
Press” (in Greig, 2:453). The 1777 edition of Essays and Treatises on Several
Subjects did not contain the autobiography, but it was added to the first, 1778,
posthumous edition of the History of England.
In writing his autobiography, Hume anticipated the keen desire on the public’s part to
know, in view of his scepticism about the claims of revealed religion, if he would face
death with philosophical tranquillity. It was in the context of the lively public debate
following Hume’s death that Adam Smith composed his letter to William Strahan,
describing Hume’s tranquil state of mind during his final months and testifying to his
strength of character. With the publication of his letter to Strahan, Smith himself now
became the target of widespread indignation for his approval of Hume’s manner of
death. A decade later he would write: “A single, and as I thought, a very harmless
Sheet of paper which I happened to write concerning the death of our late friend, Mr.
Hume, brought upon me ten times more abuse than the very violent attack I had made
upon the whole commercial system of Great Britain” (quoted in Ernest Campbell
Mossner, The Life of David Hume [Edinburgh: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1954], p.
605.) The attacks on Hume’s Life and Smith’s Letter are discussed by Mossner, The
Life of David Hume, pp. 604–607, 620–622, and by T. H. Grose in the “History of the
Editions” that begins the Green and Grose edition of Hume’s Essays: Moral,
Political, and Literary (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1889), 1:80–84.
Almost all printings of Hume’s Life and Smith’s Letter, including that of Green and
Grose, have followed the edition of 1777. A reliable version of the 1777 edition can
be found in Norman Kemp Smith’s “Second Edition” of Hume’s Dialogues
Concerning Natural Religion (Edinburgh: Nelson, 1947; Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
n.d.), pp. 231–48. I have compared the Green and Grose version with that of 1777 and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 344 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
corrected a few errors of wording and punctuation. In the case of Hume’s Life, the
manuscript has been preserved; and it is reprinted in Greig, Letters, 1:1–7, and in
Mossner, Life of David Hume, pp. 611–15. The first printed version of My own Life
and subsequent printings based upon it differ markedly from Hume’s manuscript
version in punctuation, capitalization, and spelling; and there are also some important
differences in wording. Hume did not, of course, have the opportunity to correct the
printed version. I have noted these differences in wording at appropriate places in the
present text.]
[2. ][Hume’s manuscript has: To attend him as Secretary.]
[3. ][Hume’s MS.: I there wore.]
[4. ][Hume’s MS.: in the Course.]
[5. ][Hume’s MS.: Pound.]
[6. ][Hume’s MS.: at first but little.]
[7. ][Hume’s MS.: this Fury.]
[8. ][Hume’s MS.: distinguishes.]
[9. ][Hume’s MS.: Lord Hertford.]
[10. ][Hume’s MS.: Effect.]
[11. ][Hume’s MS.: Recoiled.]
[12. ][Hume’s MS.: the city.]
[13. ][Hume’s MS.: pounds.]
[14. ][Hume’s MS.: I know, that I had.]
[15. ][Hume’s MS.: humour.]
[* ]Published in 1742.
[* ]Published in 1742.a
[* ]PUBLISHED IN 1742.a
[1. ][In the Treatise of Human Nature, Hume divides the perceptions of the mind into
impressions and ideas. Impressions are divided into sensations and passions. Hume
speaks of passions as secondary impressions, inasmuch as they usually arise from
some preceding sensation or idea. He divides the passions into the calm and the
violent. On occasion the term passion is used narrowly, as in the present essay, to
designate only the more violent passions, such as love and hatred, grief and joy, or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 345 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
pride and humility. When Hume speaks here of a “delicacy of passion,” he means a
disposition to be affected strongly by the violent passions in the face of prosperity or
misfortune, favors or injuries, honors or slights, and other accidents of life that lie
beyond our control. What he here calls “taste”—the sense of beauty and deformity in
actions or objects—is also a passion, broadly speaking, but normally a calm one. A
delicacy of taste is a keen sensitivity to beauty and deformity in actions, books, works
of art, companions, and such. This quality of mind is discussed at considerable length
by Hume in Essay XXIII, “Of the Standard of Taste.”]
[2. ][Hume sometimes uses the term sentiment broadly to mean passion or feeling as
such, but at other times, as in this passage, he uses it synonymously with taste to refer
to a special feeling of approbation or disapprobation that arises from the
contemplation of objects, characters, or actions. Taste, or sentiment in this latter
sense, underlies judgments of beauty and moral worth. In the Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding, Hume argues that “morals and criticism are not so properly
objects of the understanding as of taste and sentiment. Beauty, whether moral or
natural, is felt, more properly than perceived” (sec. xii, pt. 3).]
[3. ][An “original” connection is one in human nature itself. Hume is alluding here to
the fact that “taste” is itself a passion and has more in common with the other passions
than this essay might suggest. The connection of the various passions is discussed by
Hume in Book II of the Treatise (“Of the Passions”) and in a later recasting of Book
II entitled “A Dissertation on the Passions.”]
[4. ][Ovid (43 bc–ad 18?), Epistulae ex Ponto (Letters from Pontus) 2.9.47–48: “A
faithful study of the liberal arts humanizes character and permits it not to be cruel”
(Loeb translation by A. L. Wheeler).]
[5. ]Mons.Fontenelle, Pluralité des Mondes. Soir. 6. [Bernard le Bovier de Fontenelle
(1657–1757), French academician, poet, and popularizer of modern science, whose
“Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds” was published in 1686.]
[6. ][“The judgment” is referred to by Hume in the Treatise as that operation of mind
by which we make inferences from sense impressions, as in judgments of cause and
effect. Feelings of moral sentiment are also treated on occasion, but not consistently,
as judgments.]
[1 ][Hume nowhere discusses thematically the important question of how the various
forms of government should be classified, but he touches on the question in many
places. This essay suggests that governments are to be classified as republics,
monarchies, or, as in the case of Great Britain, a mixture of republican and
monarchical elements. Aristocracy and “pure” democracy would, in this
classification, be types of republican government, as would the representative system
that Hume describes in “Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth.” The distinction in the
present essay between liberty and despotism or slavery is not equivalent or even
parallel to that between republics and monarchies. Hume maintains that freedom can
prevail in monarchical government, just as despotism can prevail in republics.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 346 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[2 ][Tacitus (ad 55?–120?) The Histories 1.16.28. The quotation comes at the end of a
speech by Emperor Galba to Piso, upon adopting Piso as his successor: “For with us
there is not, as among peoples where there are kings, a fixed house of rulers while all
the rest are slaves, but you are going to rule over men who can endure neither
complete slavery nor complete liberty” (Loeb translation by Clifford H. Moore).]
[3 ][François Marie Arouet (1694–1778), who wrote under the name Voltaire, first
published La Henriade in 1723 under a different title and republished it, with
alterations, under the present title in 1728. Its hero is Henry of Navarre, who became
King Henry IV of France. The passage praising Elizabeth reads: “And she made her
yoke dear to the unconquered English, who can neither serve nor live in liberty.”]
[1. ]
For forms of government let fools contest,
Whate’er is best administer’d is best.
Essay on Man, Book 3.
[Written by Alexander Pope (1688–1744) and published in 1732–34.]
[2. ][French king whose reign (1574–89) was marked by civil and religious strife. He
is remembered for his partiality, extravagance, and distaste for hard work as well as
for his oppression of Huguenot Protestants.]
[3. ][King of France, 1589–1610. Henry IV succeeded in calming religious warfare,
improving the realm’s finances and administration, and curbing Spanish designs
through alliances with England and the United Provinces. He won acceptance for the
Edict of Nantes (1598), which extended religious toleration to the Huguenots.]
[4. ][A plain stretching from the Tiber River to the hills of Rome, which derived its
name from the Altar of Mars that stood there. It was a site for public meetings,
worship, and commerce.]
[5. ][As Hume uses the term in the Treatise, a priori reasoning compares ideas in
abstraction from experienced relationships. Whereas some of his predecessors, such
as Hobbes, had attempted to base moral or political philosophy on a priori reasoning,
Hume sets out to establish moral science on the “experimental method of reasoning,”
which was introduced by Francis Bacon and utilized by Isaac Newton. Nevertheless,
Hume sometimes claims in the Essays that political principles can be derived a priori,
i.e., by general reasoning on our ideas or concepts of the things in question and
without reference to particular examples.]
[6. ][See Cicero (106–43 bc), In C. Verrem Actio Prima (First Part of the speech
against Gaius Verres at the first hearing) 1.14.41.]
[7. ][Verres was Roman governor of Sicily from 73 to 70 bc He plundered the
province and committed many acts of extreme cruelty. At the expiration of his term in
70, he was prosecuted before the senatorial Extortion Court at Rome by Cicero, who
represented the Sicilians. Cicero’s prosecution of Verres was conducted so brilliantly
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 347 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
that Verres withdrew into voluntary exile before the trial could be completed. Cicero
thereby established himself as the leading lawyer of Rome, replacing Hortensius, who
had defended Verres. Both Verres and Cicero were assassinated, along with hundreds
of senators and businessmen, on orders of the ruling Triumvirate (Octavian, Lepidus,
Antony) in 43 bc]
[8. ]Ann. lib. I. cap. 2. [Tacitus, Annals 1.8, in the Loeb edition.]
[9. ]Suet. in vita Domit. [Suetonius (ad 70?–141?), Lives of the Caesars, in the life of
Domitian, chap. 8. Domitian was emperor from ad 81 to 96.]
[10. ]Egregium resumendæ libertati tempus, si ipsi florentes, quam inopsItalia, quam
imbellis urbana plebs, nihil validum in exercitibus, nisi quod externum
cogitarent.Tacit. Ann. lib. 3.c [Tacitus, Annals 3.40: “It was an unequalled
opportunity for regaining their independence: they had only to look from their own
resources to the poverty of Italy, the unwarlike city population, the feebleness of the
armies except for the leavening of foreigners” (Loeb translation by John Jackson).
Tiberius was emperor from ad 14 to 37.]
[11. ]Lib. I. cap. 72. [Polybius (200?–120? bc), Histories 1.72.]
[12. ][For most of the period between the mid-fifteenth and the early seventeenth
centuries, the island of Corsica was subjected to oppressive and corrupt rule by the
republic of Genoa. Frequent revolts against Genoese authority occurred during the
mid-seventeenth century. Recognizing that it could not subjugate Corsica and fearing
its occupation by a hostile power, Genoa finally ceded the island to France in 1768.
Although Corsica had sometimes sought French control, a war of conquest in
1768–69 was necessary to establish French authority.]
[13. ][See Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527), The Prince, chap. 4. Alexander the
Great (356–323 bc) established a vast Macedonian-Greek empire after defeating the
forces of the Persian Empire under the command of Darius III in 333–330 bc]
[14. ]I have taken it for granted, according to the supposition of Machiavel, that the
ancient Persians had no nobility; though there is reason to suspect, that the Florentine
secretary, who seems to have been better acquainted with the Roman than the Greek
authors, was mistaken in this particular. The more ancient Persians, whose manners
are described by Xenophon, were a free people, and had nobility. Their ?μότιμοι
[chief nobles, peers. See Xenophon (428?–354? bc), Education of Cyrus 2.1.9] were
preserved even after the extending of their conquests and the consequent change of
their government. Arrian mentions them in Darius’s time, De exped.Alex. lib. ii.
[Arrian (ad 96?–180?), Expedition of Alexander.] Historians also speak often of the
persons in command as men of family. Tygranes, who was general of the Medes
under Xerxes, was of the race of Achmænes, Herod. lib. vii. cap. 62. [Herodotus
(484?–420? bc), History.] Artachæas, who directed the cutting of the canal about
mount Athos, was of the same family. Id. cap. 117. Megabyzus was one of the seven
eminent Persians who conspired against the Magi. His son, Zopyrus, was in the
highest command under Darius, and delivered Babylon to him. His grandson,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 348 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Megabyzus, commanded the army, defeated at Marathon. His great-grandson,
Zopyrus, was also eminent, and was banished Persia. Herod. lib. iii. Thuc. lib. i.
[Herodotus, History 3.160; Thucydides (472?–after 400 bc), History of the
Peloponnesian War 1.109.] Rosaces, who commanded an army in Egypt under
Artaxerxes, was also descended from one of the seven conspirators, Diod. Sic. lib.
xvi. [Diodorus Siculus (1st cen. bc), Library of History 16.47.] Agesilaus, in
Xenophon, Hist. Græc. lib. iv. [Xenophon, Hellenica (History of Greece) 4.1] being
desirous of making a marriage betwixt king Cotys his ally, and the daughter of
Spithridates, a Persian of rank, who had deserted to him, first asks Cotys what family
Spithridates is of. One of the most considerable in Persia, says Cotys. Ariæus, when
offered the sovereignty by Clearchus and the ten thousand Greeks, refused it as of too
low a rank, and said, that so many eminent Persians would never endure his rule. Id.
de exped. lib. ii. [Xenophon, Expedition of Cyrus, bk. 2.] Some of the families
descended from the seven Persians abovementioned remained during all Alexander’s
successors; and Mithridates, in Antiochus’s time, is said by Polybius to be descended
from one of them, lib. v. cap. 43. Artabazus was esteemed, as Arrian says, ?ν τοι?ς
πρώτοις Περσω?ν [“among the highest of the Persians”]. lib. iii. [23]. And when
Alexander married in one day 80 of his captains to Persian women, his intention
plainly was to ally the Macedonians with the most eminent Persian families. Id. lib.
vii. [4]. Diodorus Siculus says they were of the most noble birth in Persia, lib. xvii.
[107]. The government of Persia was despotic, and conducted in many respects, after
the eastern manner, but was not carried so far as to extirpate all nobility, and
confound all ranks and orders. It left men who were still great, by themselves and
their family, independent of their office and commission. And the reason why the
Macedonians kept so easily dominion over them was owing to other causes easy to be
found in the historians; though it must be owned that Machiavel’s reasoning is, in
itself, just, however doubtful its application to the present case.e
[15. ]Essempio veramente raro, & da Filosofi intante loro imaginate & vedute
Republiche mai non trovato, vedere dentro ad un medesimo cerchio, fra medesimi
cittadini, la liberta, & la tirannide, la vita civile & la corotta, la giustitia & la
licenza; perche quello ordine solo mantiere quella citta piena di costumi antichi &
venerabili. E s’egli auvenisse (che col tempo in ogni modo auverrà) queSan
Giorgiotutta quel la città occupasse, sarrebbe quella una Republica piu
dallaVenetianamemorabile. Della Hist. Florentinè, lib. 8. [Niccolò Machiavelli, The
History of Florence 8.29: “A truly rare example, and one never found by the
philosophers in all their imagined or dreamed of republics, to see in the same circle,
among the same citizens, liberty and tyranny, the civil and the corrupt life, justice and
license; because that order alone keeps that city full of ancient and venerable customs.
And should it happen, which in time will happen anyway, that St. George will occupy
all that city, it would be a republic more memorable than the Venetian one.” The
republic of Genoa, unable to pay its creditors after war with Venice, conceded to them
the revenue of the customhouse until the war debt should be liquidated. The creditors,
who took the title of the Bank of St. George, established a form of government among
themselves, with a council and an executive body. Genoa came to rely on the bank for
credit, assigning towns, castles, and territories as security, so that eventually the bank
came to have under its administration most of the towns and cities in the Genoese
dominion.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 349 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[16. ]T. Livii, lib. 40. cap. 43. [Livy (59 bc–ad 17), History of Rome (from the
founding of the city) 40.43. The Punic Wars were fought between the Romans and the
Carthaginians. The first began in 264 bc and the third and last ended in 146 bc with
the destruction of Carthage. The Tribunes were elected by the people (Plebeians) to
represent their interests against the nobility (Patricians). A Praetor was a high judicial
officer or a provincial governor.]
[17. ]Id. lib. 8. cap. 18.
[18. ]
L’Aigle contre L’Aigle,RomainscontreRomains,
Combatans seulement pour le choix de tyrans.
Corneille.
[These lines are adapted loosely from the tragedy Cinna, act 1, sc. 3, which was
produced by Pierre Corneille (1606–84) in late 1640 or early 1641. In the original,
“Où l’aigle abattoit l’aigle” is followed eight lines later by: “Romains contre
Romains, parents contre parents, / Combattoient seulement pour le choix des tyrans.”
Cinna, who is plotting to restore liberty to Rome by assassinating the emperor
Augustus, describes his efforts to incite his followers thusly: “I painted pictures of
those dreadful wars / When savage Rome was bent on suicide, / When eagle swooped
on eagle, on all sides / Embattled legions stood against their freedom; / When the best
soldiers and the bravest chiefs / Fought for the honor of becoming slaves; / When
better to assure their fettered shame / All vied to fix the whole world to their chains; /
And the base honor of giving it a master, / Making all hug a traitor’s craven name, /
Roman against Roman and kith against kin, / Fought only for the right to choose a
tyrant.” Translation by Samuel Solomon (New York: Random House, 1969). The
“time of the Triumvirates” to which Hume refers extended from the formation of the
so-called First Triumvirate (Julius Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus) in 60 bc until 31 bc,
when the Second Triumvirate (Octavian, Mark Antony, and Lepidus) was finally
broken, opening the way for Octavian to become the first Roman emperor
(Augustus).]
[19. ][Later in this essay, Hume identifies the party division of his time as one
between the court party and the country party. See note 21 on Bolingbroke’s use of
these terms. Hume discusses the British parties in several of the subsequent essays.
See “Of the Parties of Great Britain,” “Of Passive Obedience,” “Of the Coalition of
Parties,” and “Of the Protestant Succession.”]
[20. ][In what follows, Hume has in mind the debate that raged in his time over a
particular minister, Sir Robert Walpole (1676–1745). As First Lord of the Treasury
from 1721 to 1742, Walpole mastered Parliament by the skillful use of the patronage
of the Crown to control a majority in the House of Commons. Walpole is usually
considered to be England’s first Prime Minister, although this term was applied to
Walpole by his enemies. In the 1742 edition of Hume’s Essays, there appeared an
essay entitled “A Character of Sir Robert Walpole.” In editions appearing between
1748 and 1768, it was printed as a footnote at the end of the present essay, “That
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 350 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Politics may be reduced to a Science.” This footnote was dropped in the editions of
1770 and later. Hume’s essay on Walpole can be found in the present volume under
“Essays Withdrawn and Unpublished.”]
[21. ]Dissertation on parties, Letter 10. [Written by Henry St. John (1678–1751), who
became Viscount Bolingbroke in 1712. Bolingbroke, a supporter of the Tory party in
Parliament and Secretary of State from 1710 to 1714, went into exile in 1715,
following the accession of George I and after articles of impeachment were brought
against him in the House of Commons by Robert Walpole. His flirtation with James
III, the Pretender, helped to bring the Tory party into disrepute during the period of
Whig dominance from 1714 to 1760. After returning to London in 1725, he
contributed over the next decade to The Craftsman, a periodical that opposed the
Whig government under Walpole. Bolingbroke’s Dissertation Upon Parties, which
appeared in The Craftsman in 1733, is a vehement attack on Walpole. Bolingbroke
argues that the ground for the old division between Tories and Whigs no longer exists.
Both now form a constitutional or country party, which seeks to preserve the British
constitution by securing the independency of Parliaments against the new influence of
the Crown. Walpole’s anticonstitutional or court party, on the other hand, is
attempting to expand the power of the Crown and reduce Parliaments to an absolute
dependency.]
[22. ][Hume refers here to the Revolution of 1688, which deposed James II, and to the
subsequent accession of Mary, his daughter, and her husband, William of Orange,
who was Stadtholder of Holland. William III ruled jointly with Mary from 1689 until
her death in 1694 and then as sole sovereign until 1702. William was succeeded by
Anne, the second daughter of James II and the last of the Stuart sovereigns. By the
Act of Settlement of 1701, the royal line became fixed after Anne’s death (1714) in
the house of Hanover.]
[23. ][The reference is probably to Cato Uticensis (95–46 bc), great-grandson of Cato
Censorius (234–149 bc), the noted statesman, writer, and orator. The younger Cato
was the uncle of Marcus Junius Brutus (85?–42 bc). Brutus later married Cato’s
daughter, Porcia. Cato and Brutus supported Pompey against Julius Caesar in the
Civil War. Cato committed suicide in 46 bc, following the defeat of the Pompeians at
Thapsus. Brutus was pardoned by Caesar, but later became a leader in the patriotic
conspiracy that led to Caesar’s murder (44 bc).]
[1 ][Probably James Harrington (1611–1677), author of the Commonwealth of
Oceana (1656), who maintained that the balance of political power depends upon the
balance of property, especially landed property.]
[2 ][During the period from 1698 to 1701, the House of Commons, under Tory
control, opposed measures taken by William III for the security of Europe against
Louis XIV of France. When the county of Kent sent petitioners to London in 1701 to
chide the House of Commons for its distrust of the king and its delay in voting
supplies, the petitioners were arrested. Public disgust at the treatment of the Kentish
petitioners was expressed in a Whig pamphlet called the Legion Memorial (1701).
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 351 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The Kentish Petition and the Legion Memorial proved that popular feeling was on the
king’s side in this struggle with the Commons.]
[1. ]See Dissertation on Parties, throughout. [Bolingbroke, Dissertation Upon
Parties. See Essay III, “That Politics may be reduced to a Science,” nn. 19 and 21.
Hume here criticizes Bolingbroke’s extreme partisanship and implicitly defends
Walpole’s use of Crown patronage to control the House of Commons.]
[2. ]By that influence of the crown, which I would justify, I mean only that which
arises from the offices and honours that are at the disposal of the crown. As to private
bribery, it may be considered in the same light as the practice of employing spies,
which is scarcely justifiable in a good minister, and is infamous in a bad one: But to
be a spy, or to be corrupted, is always infamous under all ministers, and is to be
regarded as a shameless prostitution. Polybius justly esteems the pecuniary influence
of the senate and censors to be one of the regular and constitutional weights, which
preserved the balance of the Roman government. Lib. vi. cap. 15. [Polybius, Histories
6.15.]c
[1. ][See James Harrington, “The Second Part of the Preliminaries,” in The
Commonwealth of Oceana (1656). Harrington indicates that monarchy became
untenable in England as a consequence of the emancipation of the vassals and the rise
of independent freeholders. This development deprived the nobility of their property
and power. Where there is equality of estates, there must be equality of power; and
where there is equality of power, there can be no monarchy. Harrington also advanced
this argument in other writings between 1656, when Oceana was published, and 1660,
when the monarchy was restored under Charles II.]
[2. ][Marcus Licinius Crassus (115–53 bc) was a member of the so-called First
Triumvirate, which was formed in 60 bc His death in 53 bc left Julius Caesar and
Pompey as rivals for power in Rome.]
[3. ][The Medici family, which had accumulated vast wealth through commerce and
banking, established an unofficial principate in Florence in 1434, which, except for
two intervals (1494–1512 and 1527–30), ruled Florence for the next century. After
1537, the ruling Medici took the official title of Grand Dukes.]
[4. ][The reference is to Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658). After leading the
parliamentary army to victory over forces loyal to Charles I, Cromwell ruled as Lord
Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1653 to 1658. When the parliament
of 1654–55 sought to revise the Instrument of Government, which had established the
protectorate, and to limit the Protector’s powers, Cromwell dissolved it and
established military rule. Cromwell was offered the title of king by the House of
Lords, but refused it. Subsequently, the House of Lords approved, and Cromwell
assented to, a constitution document (The Humble Petition and Advice) defining his
powers in relation to the other institutions of government, but this document was
rejected by the House of Commons.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 352 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[1. ][See Francis Bacon (1561–1626), Advancement of Learning, bk. 1. This work was
published in 1605. Ceres, Bacchus, and Aesculapius were, respectively, Roman
deities of crops, of wine, and of healing. Romulus, the legendary co-founder of Rome,
and Theseus, legendary hero and king of Athens, were supposedly offsprings of
gods.]
[2. ][The Neri (“Blacks”) and Bianchi (“Whites”) were opposing factions within the
Guelf party of Florence, centering around the families of the Donati and the Cerchi.
These names came into use in 1301, when the Cerchi intervened on behalf of the
“Whites” in the town of Pistoia and the Donati came to the aid of the Pistoiese
“Blacks.” The Fregosi and Adorni were among the families who contended for the
office of Doge in the republic of Genoa, beginning around 1370. In the modern
Roman republic, beginning in the early thirteenth century, the nobility split into a
Guelf party, headed by the Orsini, and a Ghibelline party, under the Colonna.]
[3. ][In the circus at Rome and the hippodrome at Constantinople, the professional
charioteers (factio) were distinguished by colors, with green (prasini) and blue
(veneti) being the most important. These contests were followed with special fervor in
Constantinople and other cities in the Byzantine (or Greek) Empire, where the
populace came to be divided into two factions, the “Blues” and the “Greens,” which
frequently engaged in bloody and destructive conflicts. These factional disputes are
described by Hume’s contemporary, Montesquieu, in Considerations on the Causes of
the Greatness of the Romans and Their Decline (1734), chap. 20, and by Edward
Gibbon in The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776–88), chap. 40.]
[4. ]As this fact has not been much observed by antiquaries or politicians, I shall
deliver it in the words of the Roman historian. PopulusTusculanuscum conjugibus ac
liberisRomamvenit: Ea multitudo, veste mutata, & specie reorum tribus circuit,
genibus se omnium advolvens. Plus itaque misericordia ad pœnæ veniam
impetrandam, quam causa ad crimen purgandum valuit. Tribus omnes præterPolliam,
antiquarunt legem.Polliæsententia fuit, puberes verberatos necari, liberos
conjugesque sub corona lege belli venire: Memoriamque ejus iræTusculanisin pænæ
tam atrocis auctores mansisse ad patris ætatem constat; nec quemquam fere
exPolliatribu candidatumPapiramferre solitam, T. Livii, lib. 8. [Livy, History of Rome
8.37: “The citizens of Tusculum, with their wives and children, came to Rome; and
the great throng, putting on the sordid raiment of defendants, went about amongst the
tribes and clasped the knees of the citizens in supplication. And it so happened that
pity was more effective in gaining them remission of their punishment than were their
arguments in clearing away the charges. All the tribes rejected the proposal, save only
the Pollian, which voted that the grown men should be scourged and put to death, and
their wives and children sold at auction under the laws of war. It seems that the
resentment engendered in the Tusculans by so cruel a proposal lasted down to our
fathers’ time, and that a candidate of the Pollian tribe almost never got the vote of the
Papirian” (Loeb translation by B. O. Foster). The Tusculans, upon gaining Roman
citizenship, were enrolled in the Papirian tribe, whose vote they were able to control.]
The Castelani and Nicolloti are two mobbish factions in Venice, who frequently box
together, and then lay aside their quarrels presently.b
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 353 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[5. ]Lewis XII. [Louis, who reigned from 1498 to 1515, invaded Italy in 1499 to
assert his claim to the duchy of Milan.]
[6. ][Italian cities during the Renaissance were divided between parties aligned with
the Holy Roman Emperor (the Ghibellines) and parties loyal to the Pope (the Guelfs).
Hume refers here to events of 1499–1500. Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, had
formed an alliance with Emperor Maximilian I to stop the French invasion. The
French forces were led by Gian Giacomo Trivulzio, who had once been Ludovico’s
own commander. Ludovico lost the city, retook it, and finally lost it again. He was
taken as a prisoner to France, where he died in 1508. Pope Alexander VI, who had
been an ally of the House of Sforza, formed an alliance with Louis XII in 1498.]
[7. ][This reference is probably to the civil war in Morocco that followed the death of
Mulay Isma’il in 1727. Hume may have read John Braithwaite’s eyewitness account
of this conflict and its racial aspects in The History of the Revolutions in the Empire of
Morocco upon the Death of the Late Emperor Muley Ishmael (1729).]
[8. ][The grand elixir is a universal medicine that supposedly can cure all disease.
Theories of perpetual motion envision a machine that, being once set in motion, will
go on forever.]
[9. ]I say, in part; For it is a vulgar error to imagine, that the ancients were as great
friends to toleration as the English or Dutch are at present. The laws against external
superstition, amongst the Romans, were as anciente as the time of the twelve tables
[The Twelve Tables (451–450 bc) codified Roman law]; and the Jews as well as
Christians were sometimes punished by them; though, in general, these laws were not
rigorously executed. Immediately after the conquest of Gaul, they forbad all but the
natives to be initiated into the religion of the Druids; and this was a kind of
persecution. In about a century after this conquest,f the emperor, Claudius [ruled ad
41–54], quite abolished that superstition by penal laws; which would have been a very
grievous persecution, if the imitation of the Roman manners had not, before-hand,
weaned the Gauls from their ancient prejudices. Suetoniusin vitaClaudii. Pliny
ascribes the abolition of the Druidical superstitions to Tiberius, probably because that
emperor had taken some steps towards restraining them (lib. xxx. cap. i.)g [Pliny, the
Elder (ad 23–79), Natural History, 30.4 in the Loeb edition. The emperor Tiberius
ruled ad 14–37. The religious practices of the Druids included human sacrifice]. This
is an instance of the usual caution and moderation of the Romans in such cases; and
very different from their violent and sanguinary method of treating the Christians.
Hence we may entertain a suspicion, that those furious persecutions of Christianity
were in some measure owing to the imprudent zeal and bigotry of the first propagators
of that sect; and Ecclesiastical history affords us many reasons to confirm this
suspicion.h
[1. ]Judæi sibi ipsi reges imposuere; qui mobilitate vulgi expulsi, resumpta per arma
dominatione; fugas civium, urbium eversiones, fratrum, conjugum, parentum neces,
aliaque solita regibus ausi, superstitionem fovebant; quia honor sacerdotii
firmamentum potentiæ assumebatur. Tacit. hist. lib. v.d [Tacitus, The Histories 5.8.
“The Jews [between the time of Alexander the Great and the Roman conquests]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 354 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
selected their own kings. These in turn were expelled by the fickle mob; but
recovering their throne by force of arms, they banished citizens, destroyed towns,
killed brothers, wives, and parents, and dared essay every other kind of royal crime
without hesitation; but they fostered the national superstition, for they had assumed
the priesthood to support their civil authority” (Loeb translation by Clifford H.
Moore).]
[2. ][Gustav Eriksson Vasa was elected king of Sweden in 1523 after leading a war of
independence against King Christian II of Denmark and Norway. He confiscated most
of the property of the Catholic church, which supported the pretentions of the Danish
king, and established a state church whose doctrines were predominantly Lutheran.
He made the Swedish monarchy an hereditary institution before his death in 1560.]
[3. ][Beginning in 1559, the stadtholders, or constitutional monarchs, of the Dutch
republic came from the House of Orange. In matters of religion, the House of Orange
favored Calvinists over Arminians, who had broken with Calvinism on the doctrine of
predestination. As a result of a dispute involving both political and religious issues,
Prince Maurice, in 1619, arranged for the execution of the advocate of Holland Johan
van Oldenbarnevelt and for the perpetual imprisonment of two others, including the
statesman and jurist Hugo Grotius, in the castle of Louvestein. After this the party in
the provinces opposed to the House of Orange came to be known as the Louvestein
Faction.]
[4. ]Populi imperium juxta libertatem: paucorum dominatio regiæ libidini proprior est.
Tacit. Ann. lib. vi. [Tacitus, Annals 6.42. “Supremacy of the people is akin to
freedom; between the domination of a minority and the whim of a monarch the
distance is small” (Loeb translation by John Jackson).]e
[5. ][The “Great Rebellion” is a name for the civil wars in England and Scotland
between 1642 and 1652, in which the parliamentary forces defeated the Royalist
forces loyal to Charles I. Charles was executed in 1649, and a new government, the
Commonwealth, was established.]
[6. ][Hume refers here to Charles I, who acceded to the throne in 1625. After a dispute
over matters of church policy and taxation, Charles dissolved parliament in 1629 and
ruled without parliament for eleven years. He called a new parliament in 1640, but
dissolved it in three weeks because it refused to support him in carrying on war
against the Scots. Later that year, as the Scottish army advanced into England, Charles
was forced to call another parliament (the Long Parliament) and to consent to a broad
range of measures strengthening the parliament’s powers against the king. Civil war
began in England in 1642 after Charles gathered a considerable army around him to
oppose the parliament.]
[7. ][These names came into use in 1641 to denote, respectively, the adherents of the
parliamentary party, who wore their hair cut close, and the Royalists, who were more
dashing in their grooming and dress.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 355 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[8. ][Stuart rule was restored to England in 1660, when Charles II was proclaimed
king.]
[9. ][The names Whig and Tory apparently came into use as English party
designations in 1679. At first they designated, respectively, members of the country
party who petitioned Charles II to summon a parliament in 1680, and adherents of the
court party who abhorred what they viewed as an attempt to encroach on the royal
prerogative.]
[10. ][The Revolution of 1688–89.]
[11. ]Some of the opinions delivered in these Essays, with regard to the public
transactions in the last century, the Author, on more accurate examination, found
reason to retract in his History ofGreat Britain. And as he would not enslave himself
to the systems of either party, neither would he fetter his judgment by his own
preconceived opinions and principles; nor is he ashamed to acknowledge his mistakes.
These mistakes were indeed, at that time, almost universal in this kingdom.l
[1. ][The Society of Friends, known also as Quakers, was founded in England in the
mid-seventeenth century by George Fox. Its tenets include trust in the inward witness
or divine principle in man, renunciation of violence and war, simplicity of speech and
dress, and the conduct of worship without an ordained ministry.]
[2. ][The Independents, or Congregationalists, emerged in England in the sixteenth
century and achieved great influence in the seventeenth century under the
Commonwealth. They viewed local congregations of believers as the true church and
insisted on the independence of these congregations from all other civil and
ecclesiastical organizations.]
[3. ][Presbyterianism grew out of the efforts of John Calvin (1509–64) to return
Christianity to its primitive form of church government. Presbyterians in England and
Scotland agreed with Congregationalists in rejecting episcopacy, or government of the
church by bishops who owed their appointment to the Crown, but they granted that
the election of ministers and elders by local congregations should be subject to
confirmation by larger assemblies, or presbyteries.]
[4. ][The Anabaptist movement, which originated in Europe during the Protestant
Reformation, broke with Luther on the issue of infant baptism and insisted that only
repenting adults could properly be baptised. Because of their vehement insistence on
complete separation of church and state and their refusal to swear civil oaths, the
Anabaptists were widely persecuted by civil authorities. In the Peasants’ Revolt of
1528, radical Anabaptists in Germany under the leadership of Thomas Münzer made
war on civil authority and attempted to establish by force a Christian commonwealth
based on absolute equality and a community of goods.]
[5. ][The Camisards were French Calvinists who rose up in rebellion in 1703
following Louis XIV’s revocation (in 1685) of the Edict of Nantes, which had granted
to Protestants the right of public worship and admissibility to civil offices.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 356 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[6. ][The Levellers was the name given to a radical egalitarian party in England under
the Commonwealth, which opposed Cromwell’s regime on the ground that it did not
truly break with aristocracy.]
[7. ][In the mid-seventeenth century, the name Covenanters was given to the party in
Scotland which defended the presbyterian form of church government. Following the
reestablishment of episcopacy in 1662 and the persecution of dissenting ministers, the
Covenanters engaged in armed rebellion and were forcibly put down by the king’s
army.]
[8. ][The term deist was widely used in Hume’s time for those writers who
acknowledged one God, but based this belief on reason rather than on revealed
religion. The deists disagreed among themselves on such matters as the moral role of
the deity, a providence, and a future life.]
[9. ]The Chinese Literati have no priests or ecclesiastical establishment.e [Confucius
(551–479 bc) was a teacher and thinker whose ideas on virtue and human
relationships profoundly influenced traditional Chinese life and thought. Included
among the tenets of Confucianism is awe for Heaven as a cosmic spiritual power with
moral significance.]
[10. ][This conflict within seventeenth-century Catholicism centered on the issue of
free will and predestination. The Jansenists viewed divine grace rather than good
works as the basis of salvation, while the Molinists sought to preserve a greater role
for man’s will.]
[1. ][Marcus Tullius Cicero is sometimes referred to in English literature as Tully.
Francis Bacon, first Baron Verulam and Viscount St. Albans, held many official
posts, including Lord Keeper and Lord Chancellor. Hume praises Bacon in the
Introduction to the Treatise as the founder of the new “experimental method of
reasoning” in the sciences.]
[2. ][See Hume’s Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, especially Appendix
II (“Of Self-Love”), where Hobbes and Locke are identified as modern proponents of
“the selfish system of morals.”]
[3. ][Nero was emperor of Rome from ad 54 to 68. Trajan was emperor from ad 98 to
117.]
[1. ][See Machiavelli, The Prince (1513), chap. 23. Machiavelli speaks of an
“imprudent” prince and not a “weak” prince, as Hume suggests.]
[2. ][Sejanus was prefect of the praetorian guard under the emperor Tiberius. He ruled
Rome for a time after Tiberius’s retirement to Capri (ad 26), but Tiberius later had
him arrested and put to death (ad 31). Cardinal Fleury was tutor and subsequently
chief minister of Louis XV of France in the decades preceding Fleury’s death in
1743.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 357 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[3. ]Xenophon mentions it; but with a doubt if it be of any advantage to a state. E? δ?
κα? ?μπορία ?φελει? τι πόλιν, &c. Xen. Hiero. [Xenophon, Hiero 9.9: “If commerce
also brings gain to a city” (Loeb translation by E. C. Marchant).] Plato totally
excludes it from his imaginary republic. De legibus, lib. iv.b [Plato (427–347 bc),
Laws, bk. IV (704d–705b).]
[4. ][Hume has in mind Holland and England, as he indicates later in this essay.]
[5. ][Longinus (ad 213?–273), On the Sublime, sec. 44. The author indeed raises the
possibility that writers and orators of genius are found only in democratic or free
governments, but goes on to suggest, perhaps ironically, that the corruption of genius
in the present age is due not to political tyranny but to the tyranny of the passions,
especially love of wealth and its attendant vices.]
[6. ]Mr. Addison and Lord Shaftesbury. [See Joseph Addison (1672–1719), The
Tatler, no. 161 (20 April, 1710); and Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of
Shaftesbury (1671–1713), Characteristics (1711), “Soliloquy,” pt. 2, sec. 2.]
[7. ][The poets Ariosto (1474–1533) and Tasso (1544–92), the physicist Galileo
(1564–1642), and the artists Raphael (1483–1520) and Michelangelo (1475–1564)
were born in various Italian principalities.]
[8. ][During the lifetime of the painter Peter Paul Rubens (1577–1640), Antwerp, in
the southern Netherlands, was loyal to Catholicism and the Spanish king. Dresden in
the early eighteenth century was often dominated by Frederick Augustus, Elector of
Saxony, a Roman Catholic. Amsterdam and Hamburg were free and Protestant cities.]
[9. ][Horace (65–8 bc), Epistles 2.1.160: “. . . yet for many a year lived on, and still
live on, traces of our rustic past” (Loeb translation by H. Rushton Fairclough).]
[10. ]Dr. Swift. [Jonathan Swift (1667–1745) wrote various works, the most famous
of which is the satire Gulliver’s Travels (1726).]
[11. ][Thomas Sprat (1635–1713) was the first historian of the Royal Society. John
Locke (1632–1704) is most famous for his Essay Concerning Human Understanding
(1690) and Two Treatises of Government (1690). Sir William Temple (1628–99) was
an important essayist and historian.]
[12. ][John Milton’s (1608–74) many notable works of poetry and prose include
Areopagitica (1644) and Paradise Lost (1667).]
[13. ][See Sallust (86–34? bc), The War with Catiline. Embittered by his failure to
win the consulship, Catiline plotted unsuccessfully to capture the government of
Rome by raising a private army.]
[14. ]Vide Asc. Ped. in Orat. pro Milone [The Speech on Behalf of Milo].
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 358 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[15. ][Philip II was king of Spain and the Spanish Empire from 1556 to 1598. Tiberius
was emperor of Rome from ad 14 to 37, Caligula from 37 to 41, Nero from 54 to 68,
and Domitian from 81 to 96.]
[16. ]Κτη?σιν δ? ?π’ ο?δεν?ς ?ν ο?τω καλ?ν κτήσαιντο, ?σπερ ?φ’ ο?? ?ν
προτελέσωσιν ε?ς τ?ν ?φορμέν˙—ο? δέ γε πλει?στοι ??ηναίων πλείονα λήψονται κατ’
?νιαυτόν ? ?σα ?ν ε?σενέγκωσιν˙ ο? γ?ρ μνα?ν προτελέσαντες, ?γγ?ς δυοι?ν μναι?ν
πρόσοδον ?ξουσι—? δοκει? τω?ν ?ν?ρωπίνων ?σφαλέστατόν τε κα?
πόλυχρονιώτατον ε??ναι. ΞΕΝ. ΠΟΠΟΙ. [Xenophon, Ways and Means 3.9–10: “But
no investment can yield them so fine a return as the money advanced by them to form
the capital fund. . . . But most of the Athenians will get over a hundred per cent. in a
year, for those who advance one mina will draw an income of nearly two minae,
guaranteed by the state, which is to all appearances the safest and most durable of
human institutions” (Loeb translation by E. C. Marchant).]
[1. ][All were Romans of the first century bc]
[2. ][Cicero, Orator 29.104: “. . . so greedy and insatiate are they [my ears] and so
often yearn for something vast and boundless” (Loeb translation by H. M. Hubbell).
Demosthenes (384–322 bc) was the greatest Athenian orator.]
[3. ]Ne illud quidem intelligunt, non modo ita memoriæ proditum esse, sed ita necesse
fuisse, cum Demosthenes dicturus esset, ut concursus, audiendi causa, ex tota Grecia
fierent. At cum isti Attici dicunt, non modo a corona (quod est ipsum miserabile) sed
etiam ab advocatis relinquuntur. Cicero de Claris Oratoribus. [Cicero, Brutus 84.289:
“They don’t even see, not only that history records it, but it must have been so, that
when Demosthenes was to speak all Greece flocked to hear him. But when these
Atticists of ours speak they are deserted not only by the curious crowd, which is
humiliating enough, but even by the friends and supporters of their client” (Loeb
translation by H. M. Hubbell).]
[4. ][Eighteenth-century Courts of Request were local tribunals set up for the recovery
of small debts. The two houses are the two divisions of parliament, the Lords and the
Commons.]
[5. ][Colley Cibber (1671–1757), English playwright and actor, who was made poet
laureate in 1730.]
[6. ][Demosthenes, De Corona (On the crown) sec. 208. See Quintilian (ad 35?–100?)
Institutio Oratoria (The education of an orator) 9.2.62; and Longinus, On the Sublime
sec. 16.]
[7. ]The original is; Quod si hæc non ad cives Romanos, non ad aliquos amicos
nostræ civitatis, non ad eos qui populi Romani nomen audissent; denique, si non ad
homines, verum ad bestias; aut etiam, ut longius progrediar, si in aliqua desertissima
solitudine, ad saxa & ad scopulos hæc conqueri & deplorare vellem, tamen omnia
muta atque inanima, tanta & tam indigna rerum atrocitate commoverentur. Cic. in
Ver. [Against Verres 2.5.67. The Loeb edition reads acerbitate rather than atrocitate.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 359 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[8. ]Ubi dolor? Ubi ardor animi, qui etiam ex infantium ingeniis elicere voces &
querelas solet? nulla perturbatio animi, nulla corporis: frons non percussa, non femur;
pedis (quod minimum est) nulla supplosio. Itaque tantum abfuit ut inflammares
nostros animos; somnum isto loco vix tenebamus. Cicero de Claris Oratoribus.
[Cicero, Brutus 80.278: “What trace of anger, of that burning indignation, which stirs
even men quite incapable of eloquence to loud outbursts of complaint against wrongs?
But no hint of agitation in you, neither of mind nor of body! Did you smite your brow,
slap your thigh, or at least stamp your foot? No. In fact, so far from touching my
feelings, I could scarcely refrain from going to sleep then and there!” (Loeb
translation by H. M. Hubbell).]
[9. ][Parnassus is a mountain in central Greece, near Delphi, which the ancients
considered sacred to the muses. The name is used allusively in reference to literature,
especially poetry. See Robert Allot, England’s Parnassus: or the choycest Flowers of
our moderne Poets (1600). Hume is suggesting that modern lawyers lack the leisure
to educate themselves in literature and poetry.]
[10. ][The Lord High Chancellor was the chief judge of the Court of Chancery, which
administered justice according to the system of equity.]
[11. ][London’s Westminster Hall housed the courts of law.]
[12. ][The Areopagites were members of the Areopagus, the highest judicial court of
Athens.]
[13. ]Quintil. lib. vi. cap. I.
[14. ]Longinus, cap. 15.
[15. ][In 45 bc, Cicero made a speech before Caesar on behalf of King Deiotarus of
Galatia, an old ally, who was accused of having once plotted to assassinate Caesar.
Rather than condemn Deiotarus, Caesar reserved judgment until he could go east and
inform himself of the whole affair on the spot.]
[16. ]The orators formed the taste of the Athenian people, not the people of the
orators. Gorgias Leontinus was very taking with them, till they became acquainted
with a better manner. His figures of speech, says Diodorus Siculus, his antithesis, his
ισόκωλον [sentences with equal members or balanced clauses], his ?μοιοτέλευτον
[clauses with like endings], which are now despised, had a great effect upon the
audience. Lib. xii. page 106. ex editioneRhod. [Diodorus Siculus, Library of History
12.53 in the Loeb edition. Gorgias (483?–376? bc), the leading rhetorician of his time
and the first to devise rules of rhetoric, was speaking to the Athenians in 427 bc as
leader of the embassy from Syracuse.] It is in vain therefore for modern orators to
plead the taste of their hearers as an apology for their lame performances. It would be
strange prejudice in favour of antiquity, not to allow a British parliament to be
naturally superior in judgment and delicacy to an Athenian mob.
[17. ][Philip II, king of Macedon from 359–336 bc, laid the foundations of the
Macedonian-Greek empire that was established by his son, Alexander the Great.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 360 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[18. ][Edmund Waller (1606–87).]
[19. ][Archimedes (287?–212? bc) was a Greek mathematician and inventor. The poet
Virgil (70–19 bc) wrote the Aeneid, the great epic of Rome.]
[20. ][Lysias (450?–380? bc) was an orator and speech writer of some note in Athens.
Calvus was a Roman poet and orator of the first century bc]
[21. ]The first of the Athenians, who composed and wrote his speeches, was Pericles,
a man of business and a man of sense, if ever there was one, Πρω?τος γραπτ?ν λόγον
?ν δικαστηρί? ε??πε, τω?ν πρ? α?του? σχεδιαζόντων. Suidas in Περικλη?ς. [Suidas,
from the Latin word for “fortress,” is the title of an historical and literary
encyclopedia, which was compiled in the late tenth century ad The passage, which
concerns the Athenian statesman Pericles (495?–429 bc), reads: “. . . the first man to
deliver a written speech in the law court, the ones before him doing it
extemporaneously.”]
[1. ][Charles V, who in 1516 had become Charles I of Spain, was Holy Roman
Emperor from 1519 to 1556.]
[2. ][Henry IV was king of France from 1589 to 1610. Cardinal Richelieu was the
principal minister of Louis XIII and the real ruler of France from 1624 until his death
in 1642. Louis XIV succeeded his father, Louis XIII, and reigned until his own death
in 1715. Following the abdication of Charles I in 1556, Spain was ruled by Philip II
(1556–98), Philip III (1598–1621), Philip IV (1621–65), and Charles II (1665–1700),
all of whom were Hapsburgs.]
[3. ]
Est Deus in nobis; agitante calescimus illo:
Impetus hic, sacræ semina mentis habet.
Ovid, Fast. lib. i.
[Ovid, Fasti (Calendar) 6.5–6 in the Loeb edition.]
[4. ][Greek poet of the ninth century bc, who traditionally was regarded as the author
of the Iliad and the Odyssey.]
[5. ][Several Roman generals bore the patrician names Fabius and Scipio. Hume
undoubtedly refers here to Fabius Cunctator, who was a leading general in the Second
Punic War (218–201 bc), and Scipio Africanus, who carried the war against Carthage
into Africa and defeated Hannibal in 202 bc]
[6. ][Epistles 2.2.187–89: “. . . the Genius alone knows—that companion who rules
our star of birth, the god of human nature, though mortal for each single life, and
changing in countenance, white or black” (Loeb translation by H. Rushton
Fairclough).]
[7. ][Peter I (the Great) was czar of Russia from 1689 to 1725.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 361 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[8. ]Tacit. hist. lib. i. [Tacitus, The Histories 1.37: “. . . now he keeps us under his heel
as if we were his slaves, and regards us as cheap because we belong to another” (Loeb
translation by Clifford H. Moore). Hume’s quotation varies from the Latin original.]
[9. ][Louis II de Bourbon, Prince of Conde (1621–86), was a French nobleman and
general. The quotation “no man is a hero to his valet” has been attributed to various
persons of this era.]
[10. ][The name peripatetic was given to the Aristotelian school of philosophy either
because instruction was offered while walking about or because the building that
housed the school contained a peripatos, a covered walking place.]
[11. ][The philosophy of René Descartes (1596–1650) and his followers.]
[12. ][Sir Isaac Newton’s (1642–1727) revolutionary theory of nature, which was
based on laws of motion and presented in mathematical form. Newton’s physical
theory vied with Descartes’s for primacy in Europe up to the mid-eighteenth century.]
[13. ]If it be asked how we can reconcile to the foregoing principles the happiness,
riches, and good police of the Chinese, who have always been governed by a
monarch, and can scarcely form an idea of a free government; I would answer, that
though the Chinese government be a pure monarchy, it is not, properly speaking,
absolute. This proceeds from a peculiarity in the situation of that country: They have
no neighbours, except the Tartars, from whom they were, in some measure, secured,
at least seemed to be secured, by their famous wall, and by the great superiority of
their numbers. By this means, military discipline has always been much neglected
amongst them; and their standing forces are mere militia, of the worst kind; and unfit
to suppress any general insurrection in countries so extremely populous. The sword,
therefore, may properly be said to be always in the hands of the people, which is a
sufficient restraint upon the monarch, and obliges him to lay his mandarins or
governors of provinces under the restraint of general laws, in order to prevent those
rebellions, which we learn from history to have been so frequent and dangerous in
that government. Perhaps, a pure monarchy of this kind, were it fitted for defence
against foreign enemies, would be the best of all governments, as having both the
tranquillity attending kingly power, and the moderation and liberty of popular
assemblies.
[14. ][The name eclectic is applied to a system of philosophy that strives to
incorporate the truths of all other systems. The Alexandrian Neo-Platonic school is
usually known as the Eclectic school.]
[15. ][These were major schools of philosophy in Hellenistic times and during the
Roman empire. See Hume’s essays entitled “The Epicurean,” “The Stoic,” and “The
Platonist.”]
[16. ]
C’est la politesse d’un Suisse
En Hollande civilisé.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 362 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Rousseau.
[Jean-Baptiste Rousseau (1671–1741), Poésies Diverses, “Sonnet,” in Oeuvres (Paris:
1820), 2.366.]
[17. ]It is needless to cite Cicero or Pliny on this head: They are too much noted: But
one is a little surprised to find Arrian, a very grave, judicious writer, interrupt the
thread of his narration all of a sudden, to tell his readers that he himself is as eminent
among the Greeks for eloquence as Alexander was for arms. Lib. i. [Arrian,
Expedition of Alexander 1.12.]
[18. ][Sallust, The War with Catiline 14.2: “Whatever wanton, glutton, or gamester
had wasted his patrimony in play, feasting, or debauchery . . .” (Loeb translation by J.
C. Rolfe).]
[19. ][Horace, Satires 1.3.107: “. . . before Helen’s day a wench was the most dreadful
cause of war” (Loeb translation by H. Rushton Fairclough).]
[20. ]This poet (See lib. iv. 1165.) recommends a very extraordinary cure for love,
and what one expects not to meet with in so elegant and philosophical a poem. It
seems to have been the original of some of Dr. Swift’sf images. The elegant Catullus
and Phædrus fall under the same censure. [Lucretius (94?–55? bc), De Rerum Natura
(The nature of things) 4.1165. In the passage cited, Lucretius, a Roman poet and
proponent of Epicurean philosophy, suggests that a man can escape the snares of love
by taking notice of a woman’s mental and bodily faults, which she tries to conceal by
various artifices, such as perfumes to cover body odors. Catullus (84?–54? bc) was a
Roman lyric poet. Phaedrus (15? bc–ad 50?) was a Roman writer of fables.]
[21. ][John Wilmot, second earl of Rochester (1648–80), a poet and notorious
libertine, was a favorite in the court of Charles II.]
[22. ][Juvenal (ad 60?–after 127) was one of the greatest Roman satirical poets.]
[23. ]Att. Non mihi videtur ad beate vivendum satis esse virtutem. Mar. At hercule
Bruto meo videtur; cujus ego judicium, pace tua dixerim, longe antepono tuo. Tusc.
Quæst lib. v. [Cicero, Tusculan Disputations 5.5.12: “Atticus. It does not appear to me
that virtue can be sufficient for leading a happy life. Marcus. But, I can assure you,
my friend Brutus thinks it sufficient and with your permission I put his judgment far
above yours” (Loeb translation by J. E. King). Regarding Hume’s reference to
“Philalethes’s friend in our modern dialogue,” see Jeremy Collier (1650–1726),
Essays (1697), which contains dialogues between Philotionus and Philalethes.]
[24. ][See Cicero, De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum (About the ends of goods and
evils), where Cato is the spokesman for Stoic ethics.]
[25. ]Lib. xvii. [Polybius, The Histories 18.4–7.]
[26. ]In vita Flamin. [Plutarch (ad before 50–after 120), Lives, in the life of Titus
Flamininus, sec. 2. Flamininus (225?–174 bc), a Roman statesman and general, was
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 363 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
charged with the conduct of the war against Philip V of Macedonia, whom he
eventually defeated.]
[27. ]Plut. in vita Flamin. [sec. 17.]
[28. ][Thomas Wolsey (1471–1530), Cardinal and Lord High Chancellor, exercised
vast powers under Henry VIII but lost them as a result of indecision on the matter of
Henry’s divorce.]
[29. ]Ibid. [Plutarch, Lives, in the life of Titus Flamininus, sec. 9.]
[30. ]Tacit. Ann. lib. iii. cap. 64.
[31. ]In the Self-Tormentor of Terence, Clinias, whenever he comes to town, instead
of waiting on his mistress, sends for her to come to him. [Terence (190?–159? bc) was
a Roman comic playwright.]
[32. ]Lord Shaftesbury, see his Moralists. [“The Moralists: A Philosophical
Rhapsody,” in Characteristics, vol. 2.]
[33. ]The frequent mention in ancient authors of that ill-bred custom of the master of
the family’s eating better bread or drinking better wine at table, than he afforded his
guests, is but an indifferent mark of the civility of those ages. See Juvenal, sat. 5.
Plinii lib. xiv. cap. 13. [Pliny the Elder, Natural History 14.14.91 in the Loeb edition.]
Also PliniiEpist. [Pliny the Younger (ad 61–112?), Letters.] Lucian de mercede
conductis, Saturnalia, &c. [Lucian, On Salaried Posts in Great Houses, Saturnalia,
etc.] There is scarcely any part of Europe at present so uncivilized as to admit of such
a custom.
[34. ]See Relation of three Embassies, by the Earl of Carlisle. [Charles Howard, First
Earl of Carlisle (1629–85), was England’s ambassador to Russia, Sweden, and
Denmark in the 1660s. The book to which Hume refers, A Relation of Three
Embassies from His Sacred Majestie Charles II to the Great Duke of Muscovie, the
King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark (1669), was written not by Carlisle but by
Guy Miège, who accompanied him on the embassies.]
[35. ][The principal writings of the Greek author Lucian (ad 120?–after 180) are
satiric dialogues.]
[36. ][See Horace, Ars Poetica (The art of poetry), lines 270–74. Plautus (250?–184?
bc) was a Roman comic playwright.]
[37. ][Justinian was emperor of the eastern Roman empire from ad 527 to 565.]
[38. ][Jean Baptiste Poquelin, known as Molière (1622–73), was a leading French
comic dramatist.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 364 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[39. ][Pericles, Prince of Tyre and Othello, The Moor of Venice are plays by William
Shakespeare (1564–1616). Every Man in His Humour and Volpone are plays by Ben
Jonson (1572–1637).]
[1. ]Or, The man of elegance and pleasure. The intention of this and the three
following essays is not so much to explain accurately the sentiments of the ancient
sects of philosophy, as to deliver the sentiments of sects, that naturally form
themselves in the world, and entertain different ideas of human life and of happiness.
I have given each of them the name of the philosophical sect, to which it bears the
greatest affinity.
[2. ][Xerxes, king of Persia from 486 to 465 bc, is most famous for his unsuccessful
invasion against Greece in 480 bc]
[3. ][The source and author of these lines could not be located. The octosyllabic
couplet was widely used in the eighteenth century in a style of satirical poetry known
as Hudibrastic, the archetype for which was Samuel Butler’s Hudibras (pt. I, 1663; pt.
II, 1664; pt. III, 1678). See Richmond P. Bond, English Burlesque Poetry: 1700–1750
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1932), pp. 145–54.]
[4. ]Dia Voluptas.Lucret. [“. . . divine pleasure”: Lucretius, The Nature of Things
2.172].
[5. ][Bacchus was another name for Dionysus, the god of vegetation and wine, whose
followers often gave way to uncontrolled emotion.]
[6. ][This name is perhaps drawn from Virgil’s Eclogues, no. 8, where the goatherd
Damon sings a love song with a tragic ending.]
[7. ]
An imitation of the Syrens song in Tasso.
“O Giovinetti, mentre Aprile & Maggio
V’ ammantan di fiorité & verde spoglie,” &c.
Giuresalemme liberata, Canto 14.
[Torquato Tasso, Jerusalem Delivered 14.62: “Ye happy youths, whom April fresh
and May/Attire in flow’ring green of lusty age,” etc. Translated by Edward Fairfax
(1600) (Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press, 1962).]
[1. ]Or the man of action and virtue.
[1. ]Or, the man of contemplation, and philosophical devotion.
[1. ][Ptolemy (second century ad) taught that the earth is at the center of the planetary
system and immovable, while Nicholas Copernicus’s (1473–1543) heliocentric
system holds that the earth moves daily around its own axis and yearly around the
sun.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 365 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[2. ][The Greek mathematician Euclid, who lived from the late fourth century to the
early third century bc, is famous for his textbook on geometry, The Elements.]
[3. ]Were I not afraid of appearing too philosophical, I should remind my reader of
that famous doctrine, supposed to be fully proved in modern times, “That tastes and
colours, and all other sensible qualities, lie not in the bodies, but merely in the
senses.” The case is the same with beauty and deformity, virtue and vice. This
doctrine, however, takes off no more from the reality of the latter qualities, than from
that of the former; nor need it give any umbrage either to critics or moralists. Though
colours were allowed to lie only in the eye, would dyers or painters ever be less
regarded or esteemed? There is a sufficient uniformity in the senses and feelings of
mankind, to make all these qualities the objects of art and reasoning, and to have the
greatest influence on life and manners. And as it is certain, that the discovery abovementioned
in natural philosophy, makes no alteration on action and conduct; why
should a like discovery in moral philosophy make any alteration?
[4. ][According to Greek mythology, the sea god Proteus has the power to change his
shape and to prophesy. If grasped hard, he takes his true shape and gives answers to
questions.]
[5. ][Suetonius (Lives of the Caesars, Domitian, sec. 3) reports that the emperor
Domitian, at the beginning of his reign, used to spend hours in seclusion each day,
doing nothing but catching flies and stabbing them with a sharp knife. William Rufus,
king of England from 1087 to 1100, engaged in hunting as his sole amusement. He
was killed accidentally by the arrow of a fellow hunter (see Hume, History of
England, chap. 5). Alexander the Great conquered the area from Greece eastward to
India.]
[6. ][Lucius Annaeus Seneca (4? bc–ad 65) and Epictetus (ad 55–135?) were Stoic
moral philosophers.]
[7. ]Plut.de ira cohibenda. [“On the Control of Anger,” in Plutarch’s Moralia, or
ethical writings.]
[8. ][Alexander Pope, An Essay on Man 1.155–56. The original reads: “If plagues or
earthquakes . . . ”]
[9. ]Plut.Lacon. Apophtheg. [Apophthegmata Laconica (Sayings of Spartans), sec.
217, in Plutarch’s Moralia.]
[10. ]Tusc.Quest. lib. v. [Cicero, Tusculan Disputations 5.40.]
[11. ][Ibid., 5.38.]
[12. ][In Fontenelle’s Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds.]
[13. ]De exilio. [Plutarch, De exilio (On exile) in the Moralia.]
[14. ][See Lucian, Menippus, or the Descent into Hades, sec. 17.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 366 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[15. ][Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War 2.53.]
[16. ][Giovanni Boccaccio (1313–75), Decameron, “Introduction: To the Ladies.”]
[17. ]The Sceptic, perhaps, carries the matter too far, when he limits all philosophical
topics and reflections to these two. There seem to be others, whose truth is
undeniable, and whose natural tendency is to tranquillize and soften all the passions.
Philosophy greedily seizes these, studies them, weighs them, commits them to the
memory, and familiarizes them to the mind: And their influence on tempers, which
are thoughtful, gentle, and moderate, may be considerable. But what is their influence,
you will say, if the temper be antecedently disposed after the same manner as that to
which they pretend to form it? They may, at least, fortify that temper, and furnish it
with views, by which it may entertain and nourish itself. Here are a few examples of
such philosophical reflections.
1. Is it not certain, that every condition has concealed ills? Then why envy
any body?
2. Every one has known ills; and there is a compensation throughout. Why
not be contented with the present?
3. Custom deadens the sense both of the good and the ill, and levels every
thing.
4. Health and humour all. The rest of little consequence, except these be
affected.
5. How many other good things have I? Then why be vexed for one ill?
6. How many are happy in the condition of which I complain? How many
envy me?
7. Every good must be paid for: Fortune by labour, favour by flattery. Would
I keep the price, yet have the commodity?
8. Expect not too great happiness in life. Human nature admits it not.
9. Propose not a happiness too complicated. But does that depend on me?
Yes: The first choice does. Life is like a game: One may choose the game:
And passion, by degrees, seizes the proper object.
10. Anticipate by your hopes and fancy future consolation, which time
infallibly brings to every affliction.
11. I desire to be rich. Why? That I may possess many fine objects; houses,
gardens, equipage, &c. How many fine objects does nature offer to every one
without expence? If enjoyed, sufficient. If not: See the effect of custom or of
temper, which would soon take off the relish of the riches.
12. I desire fame. Let this occur: If I act well, I shall have the esteem of all
my acquaintance. And what is all the rest to me?
These reflections are so obvious, that it is a wonder they occur not to every man: So
convincing, that it is a wonder they persuade not every man. But perhaps they do
occur to and persuade most men; when they consider human life, by a general and
calm survey: But where any real, affecting incident happens; when passion is
awakened, fancy agitated, example draws, and counsel urges; the philosopher is lost
in the man, and he seeks in vain for that persuasion which before seemed so firm and
unshaken. What remedy for this inconvenience? Assist yourself by a frequent perusal
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 367 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
of the entertaining moralists: Have recourse to the learning of Plutarch, the
imagination of Lucian, the eloquence of Cicero, the wit of Seneca, the gaiety of
Montaigne, the sublimity of Shaftesbury. Moral precepts, so couched, strike deep, and
fortify the mind against the illusions of passion. But trust not altogether to external
aid: By habit and study acquire that philosophical temper which both gives force to
reflection, and by rendering a great part of your happiness independent, takes off the
edge from all disorderly passions, and tranquillizes the mind. Despise not these helps;
but confide not too much in them neither; unless nature has been favourable in the
temper, with which she has endowed you.
[1. ][Or Tongking, the region of north Indochina that today is called Vietnam.]
[2. ][According to ancient biographies, the Greek tragedian Euripides (480-406 bc)
had two wives, but in succession. The first committed adultery with Euripides’s
servant, and the second also had loose morals, which supposedly accounts for his
disparagement of women in his tragedies. In Aristophanes’s comedy The
Thesmophoriazusai, an assembly of Athenian women calls Euripides to account for
his alleged insults.]
[3. ][Denis Vairasse, The History of the Sevarites or Sevarambi (London, 1675).
Hume’s summary is not exactly correct, for in the story each principal officer is
allowed to have one woman wholly for himself.]
[4. ][The vanity of the world is the theme of the book of Ecclesiastes, whose
authorship was traditionally ascribed to Solomon. Solomon was king of Israel from c.
970–930 bc His having seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines is
mentioned in 1 Kings 11:3.]
[5. ][Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, Relation d’un Voyage du Levant (1717). For the
incident reported by Hume, see A Voyage into the Levant (London, 1741), 2:248–49.]
[6. ]Memoirs de la cour d’Espagnepar Madame d’Aunoy. [Marie Catherine Jumelle
de Berneville, Comtesse d’Aulnoy, Mémoires de la Cour d’ Espagne (Memoirs of the
court of Spain), 1690.]
[7. ][Alexander Pope, “Eloisa to Abelard” (1717), lines 73–76.]
[8. ]Lib. ii. [Romanike Archaeologia (Roman antiquities) 2.25. Dionysius of
Halicarnassus was a historian and orator who was active in Rome from c. 30 to c. 7
bc]
[1. ][Joseph Addison, The Spectator, no. 345 (5 April 1712). In Donald F. Bond, ed.,
The Spectator (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965), 3:284.]
[2. ][See Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (1547–1616), El ingenioso hidalgo don
Quijote de la Mancha (The ingenious gentleman Don Quixote of la Mancha), pt. 1,
1605; pt. 2, 1615. Sancho Panza is the ignorant but loyal peasant whom Don Quixote
chooses as his squire.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 368 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[3. ][Horace, Epistles 1.18.103: “. . . the pathway of a life unnoticed” (Loeb
translation by H. Rushton Fairclough).]
[4. ][William Congreve (1670–1729), English poet, is known chiefly for his
comedies.]
[5. ][Sophocles (496–406 bc), one of the greatest Athenian tragic poets, is noted for
such plays as Antigone and Oedipus the King.]
[6. ][Jean Racine (1639–99), French dramatist, is best known for his tragedies.]
[7. ][Fontenelle, “Discours sur la Nature de l’Eglogue,” in Oeuvres Complètes (Paris,
1818), 3:51–69.]
[8. ][Martial (ad c. 40–c. 104), Latin poet, is most famous for his epigrams.]
[9. ][Abraham Cowley (1618–67) was an English writer of poetry and prose.]
[10. ][Thomas Parnell (1679–1718) was an Irish poet.]
[11. ][Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria 10.1.129. Quintilian is observing here that the
style of Seneca’s writings is exceedingly dangerous for the very reason that “its vices
are so many and attractive” (Loeb translation by H. E. Butler).]
[1. ][Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) was a Danish astronomer whose careful observations
contributed to the Copernican revolution in astronomy.]
[2. ]It is a saying of Menander, Kομψ?ς σρατιώτης, ο?δ’ ?ν ε? πλάττει θε?ς O?θε?ς
γένοιτ’ ?ν. Men. apud Stobæum. [In the writings of Stobaeus, a Greek anthologist of
the fifth century ad; Menander (342–292 bc) was a Greek comic poet whose works
were known in Hume’s time only in fragments.] It is not in the power even of God to
make a polite soldier. The contrary observation with regard to the manners of soldiers
takes place in our days. This seems to me a presumption, that the ancients owed all
their refinement and civility to books and study; for which, indeed, a soldier’s life is
not so well calculated. Company and the world is their sphere. And if there be any
politeness to be learned from company, they will certainly have a considerable share
of it.
[3. ]Though all mankind have a strong propensity to religion at certain times and in
certain dispositions; yet are there few or none, who have it to that degree, and with
that constancy, which is requisite to support the character of this profession. It must,
therefore, happen, that clergymen, being drawn from the common mass of mankind,
as people are to other employments, by the views of profit, the greater part, though no
atheists or free-thinkers, will find it necessary, on particular occasions, to feign more
devotion than they are, at that time, possessed of, and to maintain the appearance of
fervor and seriousness, even when jaded with the exercises of their religion, or when
they have their minds engaged in the common occupations of life. They must not, like
the rest of the world, give scope to their natural movements and sentiments: They
must set a guard over their looks and words and actions: And in order to support the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 369 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
veneration paid them by the multitude, they must not only keep a remarkable reserve,
but must promote the spirit of superstition, by a continued grimace and hypocrisy.
This dissimulation often destroys the candor and ingenuity of their temper, and makes
an irreparable breach in their character.
If by chance any of them be possessed of a temper more susceptible of devotion than
usual, so that he has but little occasion for hypocrisy to support the character of his
profession; it is so natural for him to over-rate this advantage, and to think that it
atones for every violation of morality, that frequently he is not more virtuous than the
hypocrite. And though few dare openly avow those exploded opinions, that every
thing is lawful to the saints, and that they alone have property in their goods; yet may
we observe, that these principles lurk in every bosom, and represent a zeal for
religious observances as so great a merit, that it may compensate for many vices and
enormities. This observation is so common, that all prudent men are on their guard,
when they meet with any extraordinary appearance of religion; though at the same
time, they confess, that there are many exceptions to this general rule, and that probity
and superstition, or even probity and fanaticism, are not altogether and in every
instance incompatible.
Most men are ambitious; but the ambition of other men may commonly be satisfied,
by excelling in their particular profession, and thereby promoting the interests of
society. The ambition of the clergy can often be satisfied only by promoting ignorance
and superstition and implicit faith and pious frauds. And having got what Archimedes
only wanted, (namely, another world, on which he could fix his engines) no wonder
they move this world at their pleasure.
Most men have an overweaning conceit of themselves; but these have a peculiar
temptation to that vice, who are regarded with such veneration, and are even deemed
sacred, by the ignorant multitude.
Most men are apt to bear a particular regard for members of their own profession; but
as a lawyer, or physician, or merchant, does, each of them, follow out his business
apart, the interests of men of these professions are not so closely united as the
interests of clergymen of the same religion; where the whole body gains by the
veneration, paid to their common tenets, and by the suppression of antagonists.
Few men can bear contradiction with patience; but the clergy too often proceed even
to a degree of fury on this head: Because all their credit and livelihood depend upon
the belief, which their opinions meet with; and they alone pretend to a divine and
supernatural authority, or have any colour for representing their antagonists as
impious and prophane. The Odium Theologicum, or Theological Hatred, is noted even
to a proverb, and means that degree of rancour, which is the most furious and
implacable.
Revenge is a natural passion to mankind; but seems to reign with the greatest force in
priests and women: Because, being deprived of the immediate exertion of anger, in
violence and combat, they are apt to fancy themselves despised on that account; and
their pride supports their vindictive disposition.b
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 370 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Thus many of the vices of human nature are, by fixed moral causes, inflamed in that
profession; and though several individuals escape the contagion, yet all wise
governments will be on their guard against the attempts of a society, who will for ever
combine into one faction, and while it acts as a society, will for ever be actuated by
ambition, pride, revenge, and a persecuting spirit.
The temper of religion is grave and serious; and this is the character required of
priests, which confines them to strict rules of decency, and commonly prevents
irregularity and intemperance amongst them. The gaiety, much less the excesses of
pleasure, is not permitted in that body; and this virtue is, perhaps, the only one which
they owe to their profession. In religions, indeed, founded on speculative principles,
and where public discourses make a part of religious service, it may also be supposed
that the clergy will have a considerable share in the learning of the times; though it is
certain that their taste in eloquence will always be greater than their proficiency in
reasoning and philosophy. But whoever possesses the other noble virtues of humanity,
meekness, and moderation, as very many of them, no doubt, do, is beholden for them
to nature or reflection, not to the genius of his calling.
It was no bad expedient in the old Romans, for preventing the strong effect of the
priestly character, to make it a law that no one should be received into the sacerdotal
office, till he was past fifty years of age, Dion. Hal. lib. i. [Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities 2.21 in the Loeb edition.] The living a layman till
that age, it is presumed, would be able to fix the character.c
[4. ]Cæsar (de BelloGallico, lib. 1. [The Gallic War 4.2 in the Loeb edition]) says, that
the Gallic horses were very good; the German very bad. We find in lib. vii. [7.65] that
he was obliged to remount some German cavalry with Gallic horses. At present, no
part of Europe has so bad horses of all kinds as France: But Germany abounds with
excellent war horses. This may beget a little suspicion, that even animals depend not
on the climate; but on the different breeds, and on the skill and care in rearing them.
The north of England abounds in the best horses of all kinds which are perhaps in the
world. In the neighbouring counties, north side of the Tweed, no good horses of any
kind are to be met with. Strabo [64 or 63 bc–ad 21], lib. ii [Geography 2.3.7]. Rejects,
in a great measure, the influence of climates upon men. All is custom and education,
says he. It is not from nature, that the Athenians are learned, the Lacedemonians
ignorant, and the Thebans too, who are still nearer neighbours to the former. Even the
difference of animals, he adds, depends not on climate.e
[5. ][According to tradition, Lucius Junius Brutus established liberty in Rome by
expelling the tyrant Tarquinius Superbus and founding the Roman republic in 509 bc]
[6. ][The Piraeum, or Piraeus, is the port of Athens. It is uncertain which of Plutarch’s
writings Hume is referring to here. Wapping was a squalid area of London along the
Thames River inhabited by sailors and purveyors of naval supplies, where pirates had
once been executed. St. James’s was the fashionable area around St. James’ Palace,
which was the principal royal residence in London (or Westminster) after Stuart
times.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 371 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[7. ]A small sect or society amidst a greater are commonly most regular in their
morals; because they are more remarked, and the faults of individuals draw dishonour
on the whole. The only exception to this rule is, when the superstition and prejudices
of the large society are so strong as to throw an infamy on the smaller society,
independent of their morals. For in that case, having no character either to save or
gain, they become careless of their behaviour, except among themselves.g
[8. ][The Jesuits, or Society of Jesus, is a Roman Catholic order for males, founded by
St. Ignatius of Loyola (1491–1556). It was noted for its centralized organization,
discipline, and concern for education. There was a Jesuit college in the small French
town of La Flèche, where Hume resided from 1735 to 1737 while writing his Treatise.
The philosopher René Descartes had been educated there, and it continued in the
1730s to be a center of Cartesianism. Hume apparently maintained cordial relations
with the local Jesuits and used their library, which numbered some forty thousand
volumes. See Ernest Campbell Mossner, Life of David Hume (Edinburgh: Thomas
Nelson and Sons, 1954), pp. 99–104.]
[9. ]Tit. Livii, lib. xxxiv. cap. 17. [Livy, History of Rome 34.17.]
[10. ]I am apt to suspect the negroes to be naturally inferior to the whites. There
scarcely ever was a civilized nation of that complexion, nor even any individual
eminent either in action or speculation. No ingenious manufactures amongst them, no
arts, no sciences. On the other hand, the most rude and barbarous of the whites, such
as the ancient Germans, the present Tartars, have still something eminent about them,
in their valour, form of government, or some other particular. Such a uniform and
constant difference could not happen, in so many countries and ages, if nature had not
made an original distinction between these breeds of men. Not to mention our
colonies, there are Negroe slaves dispersed all over Europe, of whom none ever
discovered any symptoms of ingenuity; though low people, without education, will
start up amongst us, and distinguish themselves in every profession. In Jamaica,
indeed, they talk of one negroe as a man of parts and learning; but it is likely he is
admired for slender accomplishments, like a parrot, who speaks a few words plainly.i
[Despite his views on the inferiority of the Negro, Hume strongly opposed the
institution of slavery (see note 7 to Hume’s essay “Of the Populousness of Ancient
Nations,” which is in Part II of the Essays).]
[11. ]Dr. Berkeley: Minute Philosopher. [George Berkeley (1685–1753), Alciphron,
or the Minute Philosopher, 5.26. In this dialogue, the observation that Hume
paraphrases loosely is expressed by Crito.]
[12. ][Tacitus, Dialogue on Oratory.]
[13. ]
“Sed Cantaber unde
Stoicus? antiqui præsertim ætate Metelli.
Nunc totus Graias, nostrasque habet orbis Athenas.
Gallia causidicos docuit facunda Britannos:
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 372 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
De conducendo loquitur jam rhetore Thule.”
Sat. 15.
[Juvenal, Satires 15.108–10: “. . . but how could a Cantabrian be a Stoic, and that too
in the days of old Metellus? To-day the whole world has its Greek and its Roman
Athens; eloquent Gaul has trained the pleaders of Britain, and distant Thule talks of
hiring a rhetorician” (Loeb translation by G. G. Ramsay).]
[14. ][Guido Bentivoglio (1579–1644) served as papal nuncio to Flanders and France
before becoming cardinal, and he was noted for his writings on the government and
diplomacy of those countries. See Relazioni in tempo delle sue nunziature (1629),
translated in part as Historicall Relations of the United Provinces and of Flanders
(1652); and Della guerra di Fiandra (1632–39), translated as The Compleat History
of the Warrs of Flanders (1654). There were also various editions and translations of
his letters.]
[15. ]Sir William Temple’s account of the Netherlands. [William Temple,
Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands (1673), chap. 4.]
[16. ][Julius Caesar placed great reliance on the Tenth Legion because of its courage,
and he showed it special favors. See The Gallic War 1.40–42. The Regiment of
Picardy was the oldest regiment in the French army, and it enjoyed special rights and
held a position of honor in the battle line.]
[17. ]Lib. v. [Library of History 5.26.] The same author ascribes taciturnity to that
people; a new proof that national characters may alter very much.k Taciturnity, as a
national character, implies unsociableness. Aristotle in his Politics, book ii. cap. 9.
says, that the Gauls are the only warlike nation, who are negligent of women.
[18. ]Babyloniimaxime in vinum, & quæ ebrietatem sequuntur, effusi sunt.Quint. Cur.
lib. v. cap. I. [Quintus Curtius Rufus (probably first century ad), Historiæ Alexandri
Magni Macedonis (History of Alexander the Great of Macedonia) 5.1.37–38: “The
Babylonians in particular are lavishly devoted to wine and the concomitants of
drunkenness” (Loeb translation by John C. Rolfe).]
[19. ]Plut. Symp. lib. i. quæst. 4. [Plutarch, Symposiaca Problemata (Symposiacs),
bk. 1, quest. 4: “What manner of man should a steward of a feast be?”]
[20. ][Darius I, king of Persia from 521 to 486 bc]
[1. ][Jean-Baptiste Dubos (1670–1742), Réflexions critiques sur la poésie et la
peinture (1719–33), translated as Critical Reflections on Poetry, Painting and Music
(1748), pt. 1, chap. 1.]
[2. ]Reflexions sur la poetique, § 36. [Fontenelle, “Reflections on the Poetic,” sec. 36,
which is contained in his Oeuvres, 3:34.]
[3. ][Cicero, Actionis Secundae in C. Verrem (The second speech against Gaius
Verres) 5.118–38).]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 373 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[4. ]Painters make no scruple of representing distress and sorrow as well as any other
passion: But they seem not to dwell so much on these melancholy affections as the
poets, who, though they copy every motion of the human breast, yet pass quickly over
the agreeable sentiments. A painter represents only one instant; and if that be
passionate enough, it is sure to affect and delight the spectator: But nothing can
furnish to the poet a variety of scenes and incidents and sentiments, except distress,
terror, or anxiety. Compleat joy and satisfaction is attended with security, and leaves
no farther room for action.
[5. ][Shakespeare, Othello, act 3, sc. 3.]
[6. ]Illud vero perquam rarum ac memoria dignum, etiam suprema opera artificum,
imperfectasque tabulas, sicut, Irin Aristidis, Tyndaridas Nicomachi, Medeam
Timomachi, & quam diximus Venerem Apellis, in majori admiratione esse quam
perfecta. Quippe in iis lineamenta reliqua, ipsæque cogitationes artificum spectantur,
atque in lenocinio commendationis dolor est manus, cum id ageret, extinctæ. Lib.
xxxv. cap. 11. [Natural History, bk. 35, chap. 40, in the Loeb edition.]
[7. ][Edward Hyde, First Earl of Clarendon (1609–74), The True Historical Narrative
of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England (1702–04). See Clarendon’s description of
the events of 1649.]
[8. ][A tragedy by Nicholas Rowe (1674–1718), which was performed and printed in
1700.]
[1. ][Taste, according to Hume, is the source of our judgments of natural and of moral
beauty. We rely on taste, and not on reason, when we judge a work of art to be
beautiful or an action to be virtuous. Taste “gives the sentiments of beauty and
deformity, vice and virtue” (Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, App. 1).
Taste is thus the foundation of both morals and criticism. Hume’s initial plan was to
discuss moral taste and critical taste within the framework of the Treatise, but he
abandoned the plan of the Treatise before this could be accomplished. His Enquiry
Concerning Morals gives his fullest account of how moral taste or sentiment can
serve as the foundation of the science of morals. The present essay is concerned
mainly with critical taste, and it represents Hume’s primary contribution to what he
calls “criticism.”]
[2. ][François de Salignac de la Mothe-Fénelon (1651–1715), Les Aventures de
Télémaque, fils d’Ulysse (1699), translated as The Adventures of Telemachus the Son
of Ulysses (1699–1700). Ulysses is the Latin name for Odysseus, the hero of Homer’s
Odyssey.]
[3. ][Or the Koran, the holy book of Islam, which Muslims regard as the true word of
God as it was revealed to the prophet Muhammad.]
[4. ][John Ogilby (1600–76) published verse translations of Homer and Virgil and of
Aesop’s Fables.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 374 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[5. ][John Bunyan (1628–88) was author of theological and devotional literature,
including The Pilgrim’s Progress from this World to that which is to come (1678).]
[6. ][Tenerife, the principal of the Canary Islands, is a volcanic formation whose peak
exceeds twelve thousand feet above sea level.]
[7. ][Cervantes, Don Quixote, pt. 2, chap. 13.]
[8. ][Aristotle (384–322 bc), a Greek philosopher, was the main source of medieval
scholastic philosophy.]
[9. ][Epicurus (341–270 bc), a Greek moral philosopher, professed hedonism, or the
view that pleasure is the good for man. See Hume’s essay entitled “The Epicurean.”]
[10. ][Terence, Andria (The lady of Andros). Glycerium, the young woman around
whom the play revolves, is a muta persona; i.e., she says nothing on the stage.]
[11. ][In Machiavelli’s Clizia, which was staged in 1525, the young woman Clizia
does not appear but is the center of the action.]
[12. ][Horace, Carmina (Odes) 3.30.1.]
[13. ][Polyeucte (1641–42), a tragedy by Corneille, is the story of an Armenian
nobleman whose conversion to Christianity and martyrdom lead to the conversion of
his wife, Pauline, and of his father-in-law, Felix, the Roman governor, who had
sentenced Polyeucte to death for betraying the Roman gods. Athalie (1691), a tragedy
by Racine, is based on the biblical account (2 Kings 11 and 2 Chronicles 22–23) of
the victory of God’s priest over Athaliah, queen of Judah and a worshiper of Baal.
The scene described below by Hume is from Athalie, act 3, sc. 5.]
[14. ][See Homer, Iliad 1.225, for Achilles’s insult to Agamemnon and 1.56–67 for
Zeus’s (or Jupiter’s) threat to Hera (or Juno).]
[15. ][Hume probably refers to the collection of 366 poems by Francesco Petrarca
(1304–74), which has no definite title but is known in Italian as Canzoniere or Rima.
Most of the poems are about Petrarch’s love for Laura, which began when he first saw
her in church in the year 1327 and continued after her death in 1348. It seems that
Laura was beyond Petrarch’s reach and that he loved her from afar. In the poems,
Petrarch’s love for Laura becomes a symbol for his own quest for salvation, and
Laura herself, after her physical death, is resurrected as a sublime ideal with divine
qualities.]
[16. ][See Boccaccio, Decameron, Introduction to “The Fourth Day.”]
[* ]Published in 1742.
[* ]PUBLISHED IN 1752.a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 375 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[1. ][The editions from 1752 to 1768 read “cases” rather than “causes.” See Eugene
Rotwein, David Hume: Writings on Economics (Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1955), p. 4. Hume’s point here is that general principles can be established
concerning domestic politics and commercial or economic affairs because one finds
regularities of behavior in these areas of life. These regularities arise from two
principal causes: the institutions of government and the human passions. As Hume
has observed earlier, there can be a science of politics because laws and forms of
government shape human actions in a uniform way (see above, p. 16). Moreover,
domestic politics, and commerce in particular, arise from the more universal passions,
which tend to operate “at all times, in all places, and upon all persons” (p. 113).]
[2. ]Mons. Melon, in his political essay on commerce, asserts, that even at present, if
you divide France into 20 parts, 16 are labourers or peasants; two only artizans; one
belonging to the law, church, and military; and one merchants, financiers, and
bourgeois. This calculation is certainly very erroneous. In France, England, and
indeed most parts of Europe, half of the inhabitants live in cities; and even of those
who live in the country, a great number are artizans, perhaps above a third. [JeanFrançois
Melon (1675?–1738), Essai politique sur le commerce (1734; expanded 2d
ed., 1736; translated ed., A Political Essay Upon Commerce, 1738).]
[3. ][See Livy, History of Rome 8.25.]
[4. ]Thucydides, lib. vii. [75.]
[5. ]Diod. Sic. lib. vii. [See 2.5 in the Loeb edition.] This account, I own, is somewhat
suspicious, not to say worse; chiefly because this army was not composed of citizens,
but of mercenary forces.
[6. ][Illyricum refers generally to an area along the Adriatic Sea in present-day
Yugoslavia.]
[7. ]Titi Livii, lib. vii. cap. 24. “Adeo in quæ laboramus,” says he, “sola crevimus,
divitias luxuriemque.” [Livy, History of Rome 7.25: “. . . so strictly has our growth
been limited to the only things for which we strive,—wealth and luxury” (Loeb
translation by B. O. Foster). Livy is writing of Rome in 348 bc, when Camillus was
dictator.]
[8. ]The more ancient Romans lived in perpetual war with all their neighbours: And in
old Latin, the term hostis, expressed both a stranger and an enemy. This is remarked
by Cicero; but by him is ascribed to the humanity of his ancestors, who softened, as
much as possible, the denomination of an enemy, by calling him by the same
appellation which signified a stranger. De Off. lib. ii. [1.12 in the Loeb edition.] It is
however much more probable, from the manners of the times, that the ferocity of
those people was so great as to make them regard all strangers as enemies, and call
them by the same name. It is not, besides, consistent with the most common maxims
of policy or of nature, that any state should regard its public enemies with a friendly
eye, or preserve any such sentiments for them as the Roman orator would ascribe to
his ancestors. Not to mention, that the early Romans really exercised piracy, as we
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 376 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
learn from their first treaties with Carthage, preserved by Polybius, lib. iii. and
consequently, like the Sallee and Algerine rovers, were actually at war with most
nations, and a stranger and an enemy were with them almost synonimous. [The Sallee
and Algerine rovers were pirates who operated from the Barbary Coast of North
Africa.]
[9. ][See Bacon’s Essays, 29: “Of the true greatness of Kingdoms and Estates.”]
[10. ][French provinces celebrated for their wines.]
[11. ][Virgil, Georgics 1.123: “sharpening men’s wits by care” (Loeb translation by
H. Rushton Fairclough).]
[1. ][The name Tartars was applied generally to nomads of the Asian steppes and
deserts, including Mongols and Turks.]
[2. ][Petronius (died ad 65), an intimate of Nero and his official “arbiter of taste,” is
probably author of the satirical novel known as the Satyricon, a surviving portion of
which describes the absurd conduct of a wealthy freedman, Trimalchio, as he
becomes increasingly drunk at a banquet.]
[3. ][See Plutarch, Lives, in the life of Cato the Younger, sec. 24. Cato threw the note
back to Caesar with the words “Take it, thou sot” (Loeb translation by Bernadotte
Perrin).]
[4. ][Francesco Guicciardini (1483–1540), Storia d’Italia (History of Italy), bks. 1–3.]
[5. ]The inscription on the Place-de-Vendome says 440,000. [Hume refers in the text
to Louis XIV, who died in 1715. Louis had assumed absolute power upon the death of
his minister, the Cardinal Mazarin, in 1661. Louis-Joseph, duc de Vendôme, was one
of the king’s leading generals during the War of the Grand Alliance (1689–97) and
the early years of the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–14). England was allied
against France in both wars.]
[6. ][Datames was a Persian commander and satrap who led a rebellion against
Artaxerxes II around 362 bc He is praised by Cornelius Nepos (100?–24? bc) as the
bravest and most prudent of all the barbarian commanders, except for the two
Carthaginians Hamilcar and Hannibal. See De Viris Illustribus (Lives of illustrious
men), in the life of Datames.]
[7. ][Pyrrhus, the greatest king of Epirus (the “mainland” north and west of Greece, in
present-day Albania), fought against the Romans between 280 and 275 bc The
statement quoted by Hume was made before the battle of Heraclea. See Plutarch,
Lives, in the life of Pyrrhus, sec. 16. After winning the battle at high cost, Pyrrhus
remarked, “If I win a victory in one more battle with the Romans, I shall not have left
a single soldier of those who crossed over with me” (Diodorus, Library of History
22.6.2; Loeb translation by Francis R. Walton). Hence the phrase Pyrrhic victory.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 377 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[8. ][See Sallust, The War with Catiline, secs. 6–12. Sallust took advantage of his
position as provincial governor of Nova Africa to amass great riches, and he escaped
prosecution only by bribery. After retiring to his luxurious gardens in Rome to write
history, he admitted in his works that he had once been driven to vice by ambition.]
[9. ][Prerogative refers to the executive powers of the Crown and, more broadly, to its
supposed right even to disobey the law if this is required for the public safety. The
royal prerogative was brought under parliamentary control by constitutional
developments of the seventeenth century.]
[10. ]Fable of the Bees. [Bernard de Mandeville (1670–1733), The Fable of the Bees:
or,Private Vices, Publick Benefits (1714; enlarged editions in 1723 and 1728–29). See
especially the section entitled “An Enquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue.”]
[1. ][Henry (or Harry) VII was king of England from 1485 to 1509. For an analysis of
the monetary theory that Hume develops in this essay and its relation to other views
of his time, see Rotwein, David Hume: Writings on Economics, pp. liv–lxvii. Hume’s
broad purpose here is to oppose mercantilist views that tended to identify wealth with
money and thus to encourage policies aimed at increasing the quantity of a nation’s
bullion or money. Hume argues for the general principle that an abundant quantity of
money does not increase a state’s domestic happiness and may sometimes even harm
it. He undertakes to reconcile this principle with evidence that an increase in the
supply of money can be a beneficial stimulus to industry at certain stages of economic
development and that a wide distribution of money is favorable to the collection of
revenues.]
[2. ][Hume refers here to the War of the Austrian Succession (1740–48), which Great
Britain entered to prevent French hegemony in Europe and to protect her commercial
and colonial empire by establishing naval supremacy over France. In 1746, Hume
accompanied an expeditionary force under General James St. Clair in an attack on the
French coast. Hume describes the expedition, for which he received a commission as
Judge-Advocate, in a manuscript known as the “Descent on the Coast of Brittany.”
See Mossner, The Life of David Hume (Edinburgh: Nelson, 1954), pp. 187–204.]
[3. ]A private soldier in the Roman infantry had a denarius a day, somewhat less than
eightpence. The Roman emperors had commonly 25 legions in pay, which allowing
5000 men to a legion, makes 125,000. Tacit.Ann. lib. iv. [5.] It is true, there were also
auxiliaries to the legions; but their numbers are uncertain, as well as their pay. To
consider only the legionaries, the pay of the private men could not exceed 1,600,000
pounds. Now, the parliament in the last war commonly allowed for the fleet
2,500,000. We have therefore 900,000 over for the officers and other expences of the
Roman legions. There seem to have been but few officers in the Roman armies, in
comparison of what are employed in all our modern troops, except some Swiss corps.
And these officers had very small pay: A centurion, for instance, only double a
common soldier. And as the soldiers from their pay (Tacit.Ann. lib. i. [17]) bought
their own cloaths, arms, tents, and baggage; this must also diminish considerably the
other charges of the army. So little expensive was that mighty government, and so
easy was its yoke over the world. And, indeed, this is the more natural conclusion
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 378 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
from the foregoing calculations. For money, after the conquest of Ægypt, seems to
have been nearly in as great plenty at Rome, as it is at present in the richest of the
European kingdoms.
[4. ]This is the case with the bank of Amsterdam.b
[5. ]Plut.Quomodo quis suos profectus in virtute sentire possit. [Plutarch, Moralia,
“How a Man may become aware of his Progress in Virtue,” sec. 7.]
[6. ][Cádiz was the Spanish seaport where bullion entered from the West Indies.]
[7. ]These facts I give upon the authority of Mons. du Tot in his Reflections politiques
[Réflexions politiques sur les finances et le commerce (1738); translated as Political
Reflections upon the Finances and Commerce of France (1739)], an author of
reputation. Though I must confess, that the facts which he advances on other
occasions, are often so suspicious, as to make his authority less in this matter.
However, the general observation, that the augmenting of the money in France does
not at first proportionably augment the prices, is certainly just.
By the by, this seems to be one of the best reasons which can be given, for a gradual
and universal encrease of the denomination of money, though it has been entirely
overlooked in all those volumes which have been written on that question by Melon,
Du Tot, and Paris de Verney [Joseph Paris-Duverney, Examen du livre intitulé
Réflections politiques sur les finances et le commerce, par de Tott (Examination of a
book entitled Political reflections upon finances and commerce, by Dutot), 1740].
Were all our money, for instance, recoined, and a penny’s worth of silver taken from
every shilling, the new shilling would probably purchase every thing that could have
been bought by the old; the prices of every thing would thereby be insensibly
diminished; foreign trade enlivened; and domestic industry, by the circulation of a
great number of pounds and shillings, would receive some encrease and
encouragement. In executing such a project, it would be better to make the new
shilling pass for 24 halfpence, in order to preserve the illusion, and make it be taken
for the same. And as a recoinage of our silver begins to be requisite, by the continual
wearing of our shillings and sixpences, it may be doubtful, whether we ought to
imitate the example in King William’s reign, when the clipt money was raised to the
old standard.d
[8. ]The Italians gave to the Emperor Maximilian, the nickname of Pocci-danari.
None of the enterprises of that prince ever succeeded, for want of money.
[Maximilian I became Holy Roman Emperor Elect in 1508, but because of Venetian
hostility, he was unable to go to Rome for his coronation. Maximilian then joined
with France, Spain, and the Pope in the League of Cambrai, whose aim was to
partition the Republic of Venice. Because of his lack of money and troops, he was
considered an unreliable partner in the war that followed. Pochi danari means “very
few funds.”]
[9. ][Hume uses West Indies broadly to refer to Central and South America. The
exploration and conquest of the new world after Christopher Columbus’s discovery of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 379 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
the West Indies islands off the Atlantic coast of America in 1492 led, in the next
century, to a tremendous increase in the supply of precious metals in Europe. Hume’s
point is that the increase of prices has not kept pace with the increase in coin.]
[10. ]Lib. ii. cap. 15. [Histories 2.15.]
[11. ]Plin. lib. xxxiii. cap. ii. [Pliny the Elder, Natural History, Loeb edition, 33.50.]
[1. ][Mercantilist writers had held that a lowering of interest, or the price paid for the
use of resources over time, is one of the benefits of increasing the quantity of money.
Hume continues his attack on mercantilism by denying that rates of interest are
caused by the quantity of money in circulation. Hume turns to his theory of human
nature as well as to historical examples in order to prove that low interest is produced
ultimately by the growth of industry and commerce, which reduces the proportion of
borrowers and increases the number of lenders with savings available to supply the
demand for money. For an assessment of Hume’s views on interest, see Rotwein,
David Hume: Writings on Economics, pp. lxvii–lxxii.]
[2. ][Hume offers several rules for distinguishing causes from accidental
circumstances: see Treatise of Human Nature 1.3.15.]
[3. ][Garcilaso de la Vega, “El Inca” (1539–1616), was born in Peru, the son of a
Spanish conqueror and an Indian princess, and he was brought up there until the age
of twenty. He is best known for a two-part history of Peru: I. Comentarios Reales que
tratan del origen de los Yncas (1608 or 1609) and II. Historia general de Peru (1617);
translated as The Royal Commentaries of Peru, in Two Parts (1688). Hume possibly
has in mind the discussion of the return on leases in pt. 2, bk. 1, chap. 6.]
[4. ]Lib. li. [Dio(n) Cassius (ad 155–235), Roman History 51.21.5: “. . . loans for
which the borrower had been glad to pay twelve per cent. could now be had for one
third that rate” (Loeb translation by Earnest Cary).]
[5. ]Columella, lib. iii. cap. 3. [Columella (first century ad), Rei Rusticae (On
agriculture) 3.3.9.]
[6. ]Plinii epist. lib. vii. ep. 18. [Pliny the Younger, Letters 7.18.]
[7. ]Id. lib. x. ep. 62. [Ibid. 10.54 in the Loeb edition.]
[1. ]Plut. De Curiositate. [Plutarch, Moralia, “On Curiosity,” sec. 16.]
[2. ][Edward III was king of England from 1327 to 1377.]
[3. ][In this essay and the next, Hume combats the suspicious fear or “jealousy” of
free trade that mercantilism had helped to promote. This essay seeks to allay the fear
that an imbalance of imports over exports will deplete a nation’s supply of gold and
silver money. Hume develops a “general theory” according to which money bears a
regular proportion to the industry and commodities of each nation. In the natural
course of things, this level will be preserved; and a nation’s attempts to hoard up a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 380 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
supply of money that exceeds this natural level, by trade barriers and restrictions on
the circulation of money, are ineffectual and, at worst, destructive. Hume does
concede at the end of this essay that protective tariffs may sometimes be beneficial,
but generally his writings condemn domestic market restrictions. See Rotwein, David
Hume: Writings on Economics, pp. lxxii–lxxxi.]
[4. ][Joshua Gee, The Trade and Navigation of Great-Britain Considered (1729). The
subtitle reads in part: “That the surest Way for a Nation to increase in Riches, is to
prevent the Importation of such Foreign Commodities as may be rais’d at Home.”]
[5. ][Jonathan Swift, A Short View of the State of Ireland (1727–28).]
[6. ][The period from 1100 to 1553.]
[7. ]There is another cause, though more limited in its operation, which checks the
wrong balance of trade, to every particular nation to which the kingdom trades. When
we import more goods than we export, the exchange turns against us, and this
becomes a new encouragement to export; as much as the charge of carriage and
insurance of the money which becomes due would amount to. For the exchange can
never rise but a little higher than that sum.
[8. ][The English, Dutch, French, and Portuguese East India companies dominated
trade between Europe and the Orient. The chief imports were pepper and other spices,
tea, coffee, and silk and cotton textiles. Since demand in the East for European
products was far from sufficient to pay for all that Europeans wanted to buy, silver
coin and bullion became the principal European export. This drain of specie to the
East, which Hume speaks of below, was a matter of concern to the European states.]
[9. ][The Heptarchy is a term applied to the independent Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of
England of the fifth to the ninth centuries.]
[10. ]Les interets d’Angleterremal-entendus. [Jean Baptiste Dubos, Les interests de
l’Angleterre mal-entendus dans la présente guerre (England’s interests mistaken in
the present war), 1703. The River Tweed forms part of the boundary between
Scotland and England.]
[11. ]It must carefully be remarked, that throughout this discourse, wherever I speak
of the level of money, I mean always its proportional level to the commodities,
labour, industry, and skill, which is in the several states. And I assert, that where these
advantages are double, triple, quadruple, to what they are in the neighbouring states,
the money infallibly will also be double, triple, quadruple. The only circumstance that
can obstruct the exactness of these proportions, is the expence of transporting the
commodities from one place to another; and this expence is sometimes unequal. Thus
the corn, cattle, cheese, butter, of Derbyshire, cannot draw the money of London, so
much as the manufactures of London draw the money of Derbyshire. But this
objection is only a seeming one: For so far as the transport of commodities is
expensive, so far is the communication between the places obstructed and imperfect.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 381 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[12. ][Sébastien Le Prestre, Seigneur de Vauban (1633–1707), Projet d’une dixme
royale (1707; translated as A Project for a Royal Tythe or General Tax (1708).
Vauban, a great military engineer and marshal of France, wrote also on the art of
fortifying, attacking, and defending towns.]
[13. ]We observed in Essay III. [“Of Money”] that money, when encreasing, gives
encouragement to industry, during the interval between the encrease of money and
rise of the prices. A good effect of this nature may follow too from paper-credit; but it
is dangerous to precipitate matters, at the risk of losing all by the failing of that credit,
as must happen upon any violent shock in public affairs.
[14. ][See Plutarch, Lives, in the life of Lycurgus, sec. 9. Lycurgus, the law-giver of
Sparta, ordained the use of iron money instead of gold and silver and gave only a
trifling value to a great weight and mass of this, so as to make its concealment
difficult.]
[15. ]Thucydides, lib. ii. [13] and Diod. Sic. lib. xii. [40.]
[16. ]Vid.ÆschinisetDemosthenisEpist. [Aeschines (397?–322? bc), The Speech on
the Embassy, sec. 175; Demosthenes, Third Olynthiac Oration, sec. 24.]
[17. ]Περ? Συμμορίας. [Demosthenes, On the Navy-Boards, sec. 19.]
[18. ]Lib. ii. cap. 62.
[19. ]Titi Livii, lib. xlv. cap. 40. [Philip V was king of Macedon from 221 to 179 bc
Perseus, his successor, ruled from 179 to 168. Hume refers to the thirty years from
Philip’s peace settlement with Rome (197 bc) to Perseus’s defeat at the hands of
Lucius Aemilius Paullus in 168. The texts cited in this note and the three that follow
are referring to the huge treasure that was borne in the triumphal procession of
Paullus, which was celebrated in 167 bc following his victory over Perseus.]
[20. ]Vel. Paterc. lib. i. cap. 9. [Velleius Paterculus (19? bc—after ad 30), Historiae
Romanae (Roman History) 1.9.6.]
[21. ]Lib. xxxiii. cap. 3. [Pliny the Elder, Natural History 33.50.]
[22. ]Titi Livii, ibid. [45.40.]
[23. ]The poverty which Stanian speaks of is only to be seen in the most mountainous
cantons, where there is no commodity to bring money. And even there the people are
not poorer than in the diocese of Saltsburgh on the one hand, or Savoy on the other.
[See Abraham Stanyan, An Account of Switzerland Written in the Year 1714 (1714).]
[24. ]Proem. [Appian (second century ad), Roman History, Preface sec. 10 in the
Loeb edition. John Arbuthnot was author of Tables of the Grecian, Roman and Jewish
Measures Weights and Coins (1705?), a greatly enlarged edition of which appeared in
1727 under the title Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights, and Measures.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 382 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[25. ][See Jonathan Swift, An Answer to a Paper called A Memorial of the Poor
Inhabitants, Tradesmen and Labourers of the Kingdom of Ireland (1728): “But I will
tell you a Secret, which I learned many Years ago from the Commissioners of the
Customs in London: They said, when any Commodity appeared to be taxed above a
moderate Rate, the Consequence was to lessen that Branch of the Revenue by one
Half; and one of those Gentlemen pleasantly told me, that the Mistake of Parliaments,
on such Occasions, was owing to an Error of computing Two and Two to make Four;
whereas, in the Business of laying heavy Impositions, Two and Two never made more
than One; which happens by lessening the Import, and the strong Temptation of
running such Goods as paid high Duties.” In Herbert Davis, ed., The Prose Works of
Jonathan Swift (Oxford: Blackwell, 1939–68) 12, p. 21.]
[26. ][The historic region of Flanders is today divided between the French department
of Nord, the Belgian provinces of East Flanders and West Flanders, and the Dutch
province of Zeeland. During the seventeenth century, it had been a part of the Spanish
Netherlands. In the period of which Hume speaks (1688–1752), the region was the
scene of rival territorial claims and bloody wars involving England, Holland, France,
Spain, and the Holy Roman Empire. The three wars to which Hume refers here, and
the treaties that ended them, are discussed in “Of the Balance of Power,” pp. 338–40.
Most of Flanders was under Austrian rule at the time Hume wrote.]
[1. ][In the preceding essay, Hume argued that no nation need fear that its supply of
money will be depleted by trade. Now he addresses another of the “jealousies” that
inhibit free trade, namely, the fear that trading will cause a nation harm insofar as it
contributes to the improvement and prosperity of its neighbors. This essay, which
made its first appearance some eight years later than the other economic essays,
represents the culmination of Hume’s thinking about the mutual benefits of trade or
commerce and the undesirability of raising barriers to protect even what might be
considered a nation’s “staple” commodities. According to Green and Grose, this essay
appeared for the first time in the 1758 edition of the Essays and Treatises on Several
Subjects. Greig points out, however, that both this essay and the one entitled “Of the
Coalition of Parties” were printed and paged separately and bound up with later
copies of the 1758 edition of the Essays and Treatises. The actual date of its
appearance, therefore, was late 1759 or early 1760. See J. T. Y. Greig, ed., The Letters
of David Hume (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1932), 1:272 and 317.]
[1. ]Lib. i. [Cyropaedia (The education of Cyrus) 1.5.2–3.]
[2. ]Lib. i. [23.]
[3. ]Xenoph. Hist. Graec. lib. vi. & vii. [The defeat of the invading Spartan army at
Leuctra by Theban forces under Epaminondas’s command, in 371 bc, ended the
military supremacy of Sparta in the Peloponnesus. Fearful of the growing power of
Thebes, Athens concluded a formal alliance with her long-time enemy, Sparta, in 369
bc]
[4. ][Following his victory at Leuctra, Epaminondas sought to balance Spartan power
in the Peloponnese by helping to establish Megalopolis as the new capital of a united
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 383 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Arcadia. In 353 bc, when war threatened between Megalopolis and Sparta, both cities
sent embassies to Athens, seeking her support. Demosthenes spoke unsuccessfully on
behalf of aid to Megalopolis, holding that such a policy would best serve Athens’s
interest in maintaining a balance of power between Sparta and Thebes. As Hume goes
on to suggest, Demosthenes later promoted an alliance of Athens with Thebes and
several Peloponnesian states in order to block Macedonian power. The defeat of this
alliance at Chaeronea in 338 bc made Philip II of Macedon the undisputed master of
Greece.]
[5. ][Ostracism was one of the democratic reforms introduced into the Athenian
constitution by Cleisthenes, late in the sixth century bc, ostensibly as a safeguard
against the restoration of tyranny. The procedure, which was used against a number of
prominent Athenian statesmen in the fifth century, permitted an assembly consisting
of not less than six thousand to vote to exile some citizen for a period of ten years,
after which he could reclaim his citizenship and property. Petalism, as practiced in
Syracuse, was a similar procedure, except that names of prospective exiles were
written on olive leaves rather than on pieces of broken pottery (ostraka).]
[6. ]Thucyd. lib. viii. [8.46. Alcibiades, who earlier had taken Sparta’s side against his
native Athens, deserted the Spartans and went over to the Persian satrap Tissaphernes
in 412 bc Alcibiades gave his advice with a view to his own eventual restoration in
Athens.]
[7. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xx. [After the death of Alexander the Great, Antigonus, one of
Alexander’s generals, tried to restore the empire under his own leadership, but he was
defeated by rival generals at Ipsus in 301 bc]
[8. ]Lib. ii. cap. 51. [Polybius here describes events of 225 bc, when Antigonus III
was king of Macedon.]
[9. ]It was observed by some, as appears by the speech of Agelaus of Naupactum, in
the general congress of Greece. See Polyb. lib. v. cap. 104. [Hannibal invaded Italy in
218 bc Agelaus’s speech warns that the victor in the war between Rome and Carthage
will become a menace to Greece, and it counsels Philip V of Macedon to treat the
Greeks well so that he can later count on their support.]
[10. ]Titi Livii, lib. xxiii. cap. 33. [The treaty between Philip’s ambassador,
Xenophantes, and Hannibal was concluded in 215 bc]
[11. ][As king of Numidia (202–148 bc) and Rome’s ally, Masinissa followed an
aggressive policy against neighboring Carthage. When Carthage was finally goaded
into attacking Masinissa, Rome declared war on Carthage. This Third Punic War
(149–146 bc) led to the destruction of Carthage and the establishment of its territory
as the Roman province of Africa. The territory of Numidia was annexed to the
province a century later. Attalus I, king of Pergamum from 241 to 197 bc, enlisted
Rome’s aid to check Macedonian power, but eventually (133 bc) Rome acquired the
kingdom and constituted it as the province of Asia. Prusias I, king of Bithynia
(230?–182? bc) was neutral in the Roman war against Antiochus III. His son, Prusias
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 384 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
II, who was king of Bithynia from 182? to 149 bc, was loyal to Rome to the point of
servility. Bithynia became a Roman province in the first century bc]
[12. ]Lib. i. cap. 83. [Hiero II was king of Syracuse from 269 to 215 bc Polybius
refers here to events of 239 bc]
[13. ][Charles V, king of Spain and later Holy Roman Emperor, from 1519 to 1556,
sought to establish a unified empire in Europe.]
[14. ][France is the power that Hume has in mind.]
[15. ][“They treat us like slaves, as though we belonged to them, but they regard us as
worthless, as though we belonged to someone else.” Hume here paraphrases a passage
from Tacitus, The Histories 1.37, where Otho, in rebellion against the emperor Galba,
complains of Galba’s supporter Titus Vinius: “. . . now he keeps us under his heel as
if we were his slaves, and regards us as cheap because we belong to another” (Loeb
translation by Clifford H. Moore).]
[16. ][Hume seems to be referring to the parliament of 1741–47 and to its early
measures in support of Maria Theresa, queen of Hungary, against her rival, Frederick
II of Prussia, in the War of the Austrian Succession. In 1740, Frederick had laid claim
to a part of Silesia, and when the claim was rejected by the Court of Vienna, his army
invaded and overran Silesia. Her treasury empty, Maria Theresa made an appeal for
aid to the nations that had guaranteed her hereditary succession to the Austrian
dominions. In response to this appeal, George II of England declared his intention to
maintain the balance of power in Europe by supplying troops and subsidies to the
queen of Hungary. This policy was strongly supported at first by parliament and the
people, although it ensured England’s involvement in an expensive war on the
Continent by strengthening Maria Theresa’s resolve not to purchase peace by ceding
part of Silesia to Frederick. The “factious vote” to which Hume refers came in
December 1742, when the House of Commons approved several war measures,
including the king’s request to take sixteen thousand troops from his electorate of
Hanover into British pay, over substantial opposition. English enthusiasm for
supporting the claims of Maria Theresa had completely faded by 1748, when she was
at last compelled by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle to ratify Frederick’s acquisition of
Silesia.]
[17. ]If the Roman empire was of advantage, it could only proceed from this, that
mankind were generally in a very disorderly, uncivilized condition, before its
establishment.
[18. ][The eighteenth-century rulers of France and Spain belonged to the House of
Bourbon. By this reference, Hume makes it clear that his general remarks on the
inevitable downfall of great monarchies are applicable to modern Europe.]
[1. ][The “maxim” that Hume considers here was commonly held by the mercantilist
writers and by others between 1660 and 1750. See Edwin R. A. Seligman, The
Shifting and Incidence of Taxation, 5th ed., rev. (New York, Columbia University
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 385 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Press, 1927), pp. 25–30, 46–62. Hume finds it to be partly correct, in that workers can
be expected to absorb moderate taxes on commodities by increasing their industry
rather than by retrenching consumption or by increasing wages. Since people are
often more industrious and opulent where there are “natural disadvantages” of soil
and climate to overcome, we may expect that “artificial burdens,” such as judicious
taxes, will likewise be favorable to industry. Yet Hume qualifies the argument by
refusing to apply it to taxes on “the necessaries of life” and by warning that a people
can be ruined by exorbitant or inappropriate taxes (see paragraph 2 in note b of the
variant readings for this essay). Later in the essay, Hume opposes the view that all
taxes are ultimately shifted to land. John Locke had taken this view, and he may be
the “celebrated writer” that Hume refers to in earlier versions of this essay (see the
passage in note d of the variant readings). Locke’s theory of the shifting of all taxes to
land was revived in the eighteenth century by the school of French economists known
as the “Physiocrats” (see Seligman, pp. 125–142). Hume debated the issue with one of
the leading Physiocrats, Anne-Robert Jacques Turgot, in correspondence during 1766
and 1767. For the significance of Hume’s views on taxation, see Rotwein, David
Hume: Writings on Economics, pp. lxxxi–lxxxiii.]
[2. ]Epist. ad Att. lib. ix. ep. ii. [Letters to Atticus 9.9 in the Loeb edition.]
[3. ]Account of the Netherlands, chap. 6.
[4. ][Hume has in mind excise taxes on consumable commodities produced
domestically and customs duties on commodities that are imported.]
[5. ][See Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, bk. 5, chap. 2, pt. 2: “The tax which
each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain, and not arbitrary. The time of
payment, the manner of payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and
plain to the contributor, and to every other person. Where it is otherwise, every person
subject to the tax is put more or less in the power of the tax-gatherer, who can either
aggravate the tax upon any obnoxious contributor, or extort, by the terror of such
aggravation, some present or perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of taxation
encourages the insolence and favours the corruption of an order of men who are
naturally unpopular, even where they are neither insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of
what each individual ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great importance, that
a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I believe, from the experience of
all nations, is not near so great an evil as a very small degree of uncertainty.”]
[6. ][A poll tax (or capitation or head tax) was a tax levied upon each citizen of a
community, regardless of the amount of his income or property.]
[7. ][Constantine (“the Great”) was emperor from ad 306 to 337. Initially he shared
power, but after 324 he was the sole ruler of a united empire. In The Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire, chap. 17, Edward Gibbon gives an account of Constantine’s
taxation policy and its consequences, drawing on the historians to whom Hume
alludes.]
[1. ]Essay V. [“Of the Balance of Trade.”]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 386 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[2. ]Alcib. i. [Alcibiades 1.122d–123b.]
[3. ]Lib. iii. [Expedition of Alexander 3.16 and 19.]
[4. ]Plut.in vitaAlex. [secs. 36, 37.] He makes these treasures amount to 80,000
talents, or about 15 millions sterl. Quintus Curtius (lib. v. cap. 2.) says, that Alexander
found in Susa above 50,000 talents.
[5. ][See 2 Kings 18:15; 2 Chronicles 32:27–29.]
[6. ]Strabo, lib. iv. [1.13 in the Loeb edition.]
[7. ][At the outset of the Civil War of 49–45 bc, which ended in his total victory over
Pompey and other enemies, Julius Caesar seized the state treasure of Rome, which
consisted of a huge sum in gold and silver bars and other valuables. See Plutarch,
Lives, in the life of Caesar, sec. 35.]
[8. ][Hume’s reflections in this essay should be seen against the background of
eighteenth-century controversy as to whether public debt is beneficial or harmful. The
French economist Melon, as well as some in Britain, argued that the national debt was
nourishment for the body politic or a treasure that enriched the nation, but most
British writers, including Hume and Adam Smith, were alarmed at the growing public
debt. See Shutaro Matsushita, The Economic Effects of Public Debts (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1929), chap. 1. Smith develops views very much along
the lines of Hume’s essay, but in greater detail, in The Wealth of Nations, bk. 5, chap.
3. Hume’s position on fiscal policy is summarized by Rotwein in David Hume:
Writings on Economics, pp. lxxxiii–lxxxviii.]
[9. ][This passage is intended chiefly as a criticism of Sir Robert Walpole, who had
played a leading role in the House of Commons from his election in 1701 to his
resignation as “Prime Minister” in 1742, and of the Whigs who supported him.
Hume’s intent is somewhat clearer in a passage omitted from this version of the essay
(see the reference to “Lord Orford” in note c of the variant readings; Walpole was
made First Earl of Orford in 1742). The omitted passage is closely paraphrased by
Adam Smith: “To stop this clamour Sir Robert Walpole endeavoured to shew that the
public debt was no inconvenience, tho’ it is to be supposed that a man of his abilities
saw the contrary himself” (Lectures on Jurisprudence [London: Oxford University
Press, 1978; Indianapolis: Liberty Classics, 1982], p. 515). In 1717, Walpole had been
instrumental in establishing a sinking fund to redeem the principal of the national
debt, and this policy was at least partially successful in the decade that followed. In
1733, however, Walpole insisted that Parliament take money from the sinking fund to
meet current expenses, arguing that this would be less burdensome to the country than
raising the land tax. This measure was opposed by those who saw the sinking fund as
a “sacred blessing” and “the nation’s only hope.” Money was regularly diverted from
the sinking fund in the subsequent years of Walpole’s ministry. See Norris A. Brisco,
The Economic Policy of Robert Walpole (New York: AMS Press, 1967), chap. 2.
Hume is suggesting in this passage that Walpole’s justification for continuing the debt
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 387 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
is as obviously fallacious as speeches in praise of tyrants (Busiris, according to Greek
mythology, was a cruel Egyptian king) or other blamable things.]
[10. ][Presumably Hume means shares of stock in the British East India Company.]
[11. ][The Jacobites were the adherents of the Stuart cause after the Revolution of
1688. There was a Jacobite rising in 1715 in support of James Edward Stuart, the
“Old Pretender,” and another in 1745 in support of Charles Edward Stuart, the
“Young Pretender.” Jacobite sentiment was particularly strong in the Scottish
Highlands.]
[12. ][See Melon, Essai politique sur le commerce, chap. 23: “The debts of a state are
the debts of the right hand to the left hand, of which the body will not be weakened at
all, if it has the necessary quantity of nourishments and if it knows how to distribute
those (debts).” Quoted in Matsushita, The Economic Effects of Public Debts, p. 20.]
[13. ][Adam Smith describes the several methods of borrowing used by the British
government in the eighteenth century. These included a perpetual annuity equivalent
to the interest, which the government could redeem at any time by paying back the
principal on the sum borrowed. This way of raising money was known as perpetual
funding, or more simply as funding. Other types of annuities ran for a fixed term or
for the life of the lender. See The Wealth of Nations, bk. 5, chap. 3.]
[14. ][Archibald Hutcheson, A Collection of Treatises relating to the National Debts
and Funds (1721).]
[15. ][The period from 1643 to 1661, during the early reign of Louis XIV, when
responsibility for ruling France lay chiefly with Cardinal Mazarin.]
[16. ][By speaking of an unalienable right to self-preservation (see also the Treatise of
Human Nature, 3.2.10), Hume calls to mind the political thought of Thomas Hobbes
and John Locke as well as such later formulations as the American Declaration of
Independence. In general, however, Hume opposes the Hobbesian tradition by
denying that the desire for self-preservation is the fundamental passion by reference to
which man’s moral and political life must be understood. He explicitly criticizes the
“selfish system of morals” of Hobbes and Locke (An Enquiry Concerning the
Principles of Morals, App. 2) and emphasizes that the disinterested passions often
override the interested ones. It is true that all creatures, including men, necessarily
perform those actions that tend to self-preservation (Treatise, 1.3.16), that “the love of
life” is one of the instincts originally implanted in our natures (Treatise, 2.3.3.), and
that we have a natural “horror of death” (see “Of Suicide,” p. 580). Nevertheless,
Hume gives this instinct only slight attention and does not say that it dominates the
other passions. Unlike Hobbes, Hume recognizes the nobility of courage and of selfsacrifice
for the sake of others. He acknowledges a right of suicide when life becomes
burdensome (see “Of Suicide,” pp. 580–89).]
[17. ][Louis XV, during the War of the Austrian Succession.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 388 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[18. ]Hist. lib. iii. [55: “But the mob attended in delight on the great indulgences that
he bestowed; the most foolish citizens bought them, while the wise regarded as
worthless privileges which could neither be granted nor accepted if the state was to
stand (Loeb translation by Clifford H. Moore). Tacitus is commenting here on the
efforts of the emperor Vitellius, in ad 69, to secure the favor of the people in his
unsuccessful struggle with Vespasian. It is striking that Hume speaks of Tacitus’s
reasoning as “eternally true.”]
[19. ]I have heard it has been computed, that all the creditors of the public, natives
and foreigners, amount only to 17,000. These make a figure at present on their
income; but in case of a public bankruptcy, would, in an instant, become the lowest,
as well as the most wretched of the people. The dignity and authority of the landed
gentry and nobility is much better rooted; and would render the contention very
unequal, if ever we come to that extremity. One would incline to assign to this event a
very near period, such as half a century, had not our fathers’ prophecies of this kind
been already found fallacious, by the duration of our public credit so much beyond all
reasonable expectation. When the astrologers in France were every year foretelling
the death of Henry IV. These fellows, says he, must be right at last. We shall,
therefore, be more cautious than to assign any precise date; and shall content
ourselves with pointing out the event in general.
[1. ]His harangue for it is still extant; περ? Συμμορίας. [Demosthenes, On the NavyBoards,
secs. 17–22.]
[2. ]Pro Ctesiphonte. [Demosthenes, In Defense of Ctesiphon (or, On the Crown),
secs. 102–9.]
[3. ][Hume is referring to Demosthenes’ defense of Ctesiphon in his oration On the
Crown.]
[4. ]Plutarchusin vita decem oratorum. [Moralia, “Lives of the Ten Orators,” under
“Hypereides,” 849a. Philip of Macedon defeated the Athenians and Thebans at
Chaeronea in 338 bc] Demosthenes gives a different account of this law.
ContraAristogiton. orat. II. [803–4.] He says, that its purport was, to render the ?τιμοι
?πίτιμοι [“the disenfranchised enfranchised”], or to restore the privilege of bearing
offices to those who had been declared incapable. Perhaps these were both clauses of
the same law.
[5. ]The senate of the Bean was only a less numerous mob, chosen by lot from among
the people; and their authority was not great.
[6. ]InCtesiphontem. [Aeschines, Against Ctesiphon, secs. 5–8.] It is remarkable, that
the first step after the dissolution of the Democracy by Critias and the Thirty, was to
annul the γραφ? παρανόμων, as we learn from Demosthenes κατ? Τιμοκ. [Against
Timocrates.] The orator in this oration gives us the words of the law, establishing the
γραφ? παρανόμων, pag. 297. ex edit.Aldi. [sec. 33 in the Loeb edition]. And he
accounts for it, from the same principles we here reason upon.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 389 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[7. ]Plut.in vitaPelop. [in the life of Pelopidas, sec. 25.]
[8. ]Demost.Olynth. I.2. [Hume refers to Eubulus, an important Athenian politician of
the mid-fourth century bc and to his legislation regarding the Theoric Fund (theorika).
This fund had been established by Pericles to enable the poorer citizens to attend the
public festivals. Through the efforts of Eubulus, laws were enacted that required that
all of the city’s surplus revenues should go to the Theoric Fund and, moreover, that
made it a capital offense to try to repeal this revenue law by the indictment of
illegality. In the First Olynthiac Oration (secs. 19–20), Demosthenes points out that
unless the city draws on this fund to pay for a war against Philip, a special tax must be
levied for the war. The Third Olynthiac (secs. 10–13) calls for the repeal of the laws
restricting use of the Theoric Fund.]
[9. ]Demost.contraLept. [Against Leptines, secs. 1–4.]
[10. ]Demost.contraAristocratem. [Against Aristocrates, sec. 86.]
[11. ]Essay on the freedom of wit and humour, part 3. § 2. [This essay appears in
Shaftesbury’s Characteristicks, vol. 1. In the section cited by Hume, Shaftesbury
argues that while men are naturally inclined to associate and even to make civil
government, they tend to prefer the closeness of small associations to the remoteness
of large nations. Thus when “the Society grows vast and bulky,” it is natural for men
to seek a narrower sphere in which to exercise their powers by forming parties or
factions or by “cantonizing,” i.e., dividing themselves into smaller associations of an
institutional or territorial kind. Shaftesbury continues: “Thus we have Wheels within
Wheels. And in some National Constitutions (notwithstanding the Absurdity in
Politicks) we have one Empire within another.” Hume takes this as a reference to the
German empire, with its confederated states.]
[12. ][A comitia was an assembly of the Roman people to vote on business presented
to them by the magistrates. The comitia curiata was the most ancient of the three
types of assembly, but in the late republic its work was confined largely to the formal
confirmation of magistrates, adoptions, and wills. The comitia centuriata was
supposedly instituted by one of the early kings, Servius Tullius, in the sixth century bc
It was concerned with the enactment of laws, the election of the highest magistrates
and of the censors, the declaration of war and peace, and the infliction of the death
penalty for political offences. The comitia tributa, besides enacting legislation on
nearly every matter of business, elected the tribunes of the plebs and the plebeian
aediles, and held trials for noncapital offenses. In the comitia centuriata, the people
voted by groups, called centuries, which were distributed into five main classes
according to wealth. There were also two additional classes, the equites (or knights)
and the plebeians. The two wealthiest classes, along with the equites, had well over a
majority of the total number of voting centuries, even though the number of citizens
in those centuries was far less than the number in the other three classes, to say
nothing of the number of plebeians. Thus if the wealthiest citizens were united, it was
unnecessary for the other classes to vote at all. In the comitia tributa, the people voted
by electoral divisions or “tribes,” with each tribe having one vote, irrespective of its
number of voters. Since only four of the thirty-five tribes represented the city of
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 390 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Rome, power in the comitia tributa lay decisively in the hands of the country tribes
and thus of the agricultural middle class. Hume’s description of voting in the comitia
centuriata is probably drawn from Livy, History of Rome 1.43.]
[13. ][Appian, Roman History: The Civil Wars 3.27–30. Decimus Brutus had been
assigned command of Cisalpine Gaul, in north Italy, by Julius Caesar; and he refused,
after Caesar’s death in 44 bc, to surrender the province to Mark Antony.]
[14. ][One of the controversies between Charles I and Parliament in the period leading
up to the Civil War involved the king’s right, without parliamentary approval, to
impose a levy known as “ship money” for outfitting the navy. John Hampden
(1594–1643), a member of the House of Commons and first cousin of Oliver
Cromwell, refused to pay twenty shillings assessed on one of his estates under a writ
for ship money issued in 1735. Hampden was tried in the Court of the Exchequer and,
in 1738, was found guilty by a vote of 7 to 5. By virtue of his trial, Hampden became
a parliamentary leader and a symbol for those who sought to protect liberty and
property by limiting the royal prerogative.]
[15. ][From medieval times the British Crown has claimed the power to impress men
without their consent for service in the navy. Naval parties known as “press gangs”
were often used before the nineteenth century to recruit by force a quota of seamen.
The king’s impressment of British subjects in the colonies was one of the grievances
that led to the American Revolution.]
[16. ][By speaking here of a state of nature, Hume seems to be closer to Hobbes and
Locke than to his own position elsewhere. In the Treatise of Human Nature, Hume
had insisted that since man’s “very first state and situation may justly be esteem’d
social,” the “suppos’d state of nature” must be regarded as “a mere philosophical
fiction, which never had, and never cou’d have any reality” (3.2.2). In the Enquiry
Concerning the Principles of Morals, he says the following of the state of nature:
“Whether such a condition of human nature could ever exist, or if it did, could
continue so long as to merit the appellation of a state, may justly be doubted. Men are
necessarily born in a family-society, at least; and are trained up by their parents to
some rule of conduct and behaviour” (sec. 3, pt. 1). Hume thus rejects the state of
nature, conceived as a strictly solitary and asocial condition of man. Yet the state of
nature might be understood as only a condition without civil society, or government.
Even Hobbes had granted that family society might develop in the state of nature.
Hume could endorse a “state of nature” thus understood, for he emphasizes that large
societies may subsist for some time without the establishment of government. Society
without government is “one of the most natural states of men, and must subsist with
the conjunction of many families, and long after the first generation” (Treatise, 3.2.8).
Be this as it may, the passage here seems to be close to the view of Hobbes and Locke
that the state of nature is renewed in civil society whenever an individual’s life or
liberty is threatened by another, even by the civil authority.]
[1. ]Columella says [On Agriculture], lib. iii. cap. 8. that in Ægypt and Africa the
bearing of twins was frequent, and even customary; gemini partus familiares, ac pæne
solennes sunt. If this was true, there is a physical difference both in countries and
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 391 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
ages. For travellers make no such remarks on these countries at present. On the
contrary, we are apt to suppose the northern nations more prolific. As those two
countries were provinces of the Roman empire, it is difficult, though not altogether
absurd, to suppose that such a man as Columella might be mistaken with regard to
them.
[2. ][Hume’s essay is directed against the common supposition of his time that the
ancient world was more populous than the modern world. Hume refers to the essay in
correspondence of 1750 and mentions Isaak Vossius (1618–89) and Montesquieu as
writers who exaggerate the populousness of antiquity (see Greig, Letters of David
Hume, 1, 140). In the summer of 1751, Hume read the manuscript of a fellow member
of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, Dr. Robert Wallace, which argued for the
greater populousness of the ancient world. Wallace is the “eminent clergyman” to
whose discourse Hume draws attention in a footnote to the earliest editions of the
present essay (see note a in the variant readings). As a result of Hume’s urging and
the interest created by the footnote, Wallace published his work in 1753, along with
an appendix critical of Hume’s arguments, under the title of A Dissertation on the
Numbers of Mankind in Antient and Modern Times. Hume rewrote his footnote for
some later editions to take notice of Wallace’s attempted refutation. Although Hume
generously acknowledges that Wallace has detected “many mistakes” in his
authorities and reasonings, he saw fit to make only slight amendments in his essay.
Hume’s relations with Wallace are examined in Mossner, The Life of David Hume,
pp. 260–68. For a discussion of population theories of Hume’s time and the influence
of his essay, see Charles E. Stangeland, Pre-Malthusian Doctrines of Population
(New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1966; reprint of the 1904 ed.); and Joseph J.
Spengler, French Predecessors of Malthus (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,
1942). P. A. Brunt, in his recent study of the population of ancient Italy, speaks of
Hume’s essay as an “epoch-making” demographic study and points out that, despite
the availability of better techniques where facts are more plentiful, Hume’s method of
conjecturing from literary texts “must still be employed by the student of the
population of Republican Italy, as the only one which can at least enable us to
determine whether that population numbered some 14 millions or only 7 or 8” (Italian
Manpower: 225 bc–ad 14 [Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971], pp. 11–12).]
[3. ][See Isaak Vossius, Variarum Observationum Liber (1685), pp. 1–68. The
opening essay of this book considers the size of ancient Rome and other cities and
tries to prove that Rome had a population of fourteen million, with an area twenty
times greater than that of Paris and London combined.]
[4. ]LettresPersanes. See also L’Esprit de Loix, liv. xxiii. cap. 17, 18, 19. [Charles de
Secondat, Baron de La Brède et de Montesquieu (1689–1755) published The Persian
Letters anonymously in 1721. Letters 112–22 argue that the population of the world
has decreased greatly since ancient times and that the decrease is to be explained in
terms of moral rather than physical causes. Book 23 of The Spirit of the Laws (1748)
deals with the physical and moral determinants of population and argues, in the
chapters cited by Hume, that a general depopulation of Europe and Asia Minor
occurred as the little republics of ancient times were swallowed up in the Roman
Empire. The passage that Hume paraphrases can be found in The Persian Letters, no.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 392 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
112. (The passage is amended in the 1758 edition of The Persian Letters to read “a
tenth” rather than “the fiftieth part.”) For a comparison of Hume’s essay with
Montesquieu’s writings on population, see Roger B. Oake, “Montesquieu and Hume,”
Modern Language Quarterly 2 (March 1941): 25–41.]
[5. ]This too is a good reason why the small-pox does not depopulate countries so
much as may at first sight be imagined. Where there is room for more people, they
will always arise, even without the assistance of naturalization bills. It is remarked by
Don Geronimo de Ustariz, that the provinces of Spain, which send most people to the
Indies, are most populous; which proceeds from their superior riches. [See Gerónimo
de Uztáriz, Theorica, y practica de comercio, y de marina (1724); translated as The
Theory and Practice of Commerce and Maritime Affairs (1751), chap. 12.]
[6. ][The principle that Hume states here—that a large population is a sign of a happy
and virtuous nation and of wise institutions—was widely held in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, and it serves to connect the question of population size to
important issues in moral and political philosophy. For example, the debate over the
populousness of ancient and modern nations was part of a broader dispute as to the
comparative worth of ancient and modern ways of life. The alleged depopulation of
the world in modern times could be taken as evidence of the defectiveness of
modernity. The goodness of such things as luxury, commerce, and republicanism was
often judged in terms of the tendency of these things to promote or retard the increase
of population, and public policies that would promote an increase were in favor. This
favorable view of large and growing populations was brought into question at the turn
of the nineteenth century by the writings of T. R. Malthus (1766–1834), which
emphasize the tendency of population growth to outrun the supply of food. On this
general question, see Ernest Campbell Mossner, “Hume and the Ancient–Modern
Controversy, 1725–1752: A Study in Creative Scepticism,” University of Texas
Studies in English 28 (1949): 139–53.]
[7. ][This paragraph and the ones that follow are notable for their strong
condemnation of domestic slavery as a condition far worse than submission to even
the most arbitrary civil government. In this and in his insistence that slavery debases
even the slave masters by turning them into petty tyrants, Hume anticipates the
arguments of many in Britain and America who agreed with him in opposing slavery.]
[8. ]Suetonius in vita Claudii. [The Lives of the Caesars, in the life of Claudius, sec.
25.]
[9. ]Plut. in vita Catonis. [Plutarch, Lives, in the life of Marcus Cato, sec. 4.]
[10. ]Lib. i. cap. 6.
[11. ]Id. lib. xi. cap. 1.
[12. ]Amor. lib. i. eleg. 6. [Amores 1.6.]
[13. ]Sueton.de claris rhetor. [Suetonius, Of Illustrious Rhetoricians, sec. 3.] So also
the ancient poet, Janitoris tintinnire impedimenta audio. [“I hear the door-keeper’s
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 393 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
impediments rattling.” This fragment from the Roman poet Afranicus Vopisco
(second century bc) is recorded in Nonius Marcellus, De compendiosa doctrina 40
M.]
[14. ]In Oniterem orat. I. [Against Onetor 1.37.]
[15. ]The same practice was very common in Rome; but Cicero seems not to think
this evidence so certain as the testimony of free-citizens. Pro Cælio. [A Speech in
Defense of Marcus Caelius, sec. 28.]
[16. ]Epist. 122. The inhuman sports exhibited at Rome, may justly be considered too
as an effect of the people’s contempt for slaves, and was also a great cause of the
general inhumanity of their princes and rulers. Who can read the accounts of the
amphitheatrical entertainments without horror? Or who is surprised, that the emperors
should treat that people in the same way the people treated their inferiors? One’s
humanity is apt to renew the barbarous wish of Caligula, that the people had but one
neck: A man could almost be pleased, by a single blow, to put an end to such a race of
monsters. You may thank God, says the author above cited, (epist. 7.) addressing
himself to the Roman people, that you have a master (to wit the mild and merciful
Nero) who is incapable of learning cruelty from your example. This was spoke in the
beginning of his reign: But he fitted them very well afterwards; and, no doubt, was
considerably improved by the sight of the barbarous objects, to which he had, from
his infancy, been accustomed.
[17. ]We may here observe, that if domestic slavery really encreased populousness, it
would be an exception to the general rule, that the happiness of any society and its
populousness are necessary attendants. A master, from humour or interest, may make
his slaves very unhappy, yet be careful, from interest, to encrease their number. Their
marriage is not a matter of choice with them, more than any other action of their life.
[18. ]Ten thousand slaves in a day have often been sold for the use of the Romans, at
Delus in Cilicia. Strabo, lib. xiv. [Geography 14.5.2.]
[19. ]Columella, lib. i. proœm. et cap. 2. et 7. Varro [116–27 bc, Rerum Rusticarum
(On agriculture)], lib. iii. cap. 1. Horat. [Horace, Odes] lib. ii. od. 15. Tacit.annal. lib.
iii. cap. 54. Sueton.in vitaAug. [in the life of Augustus] cap. xlii. Plin. lib. xviii. cap.
13. [Pliny the Elder, Natural History. The appropriate citation in the Loeb edition
would seem to be 18.4.]
[20. ]Minore indies plebe ingenua, says Tacitus, ann. lib. xxiv. cap. 7. [Tacitus,
Annals 4.27 in the Loeb edition: “The free-born populace dwindled day by day”
(Loeb translation by John Jackson).]
[21. ]As servus was the name of the genus, and verna of the species, without any
correlative, this forms a strong presumption, that the latter were by far the least
numerous. It is an universal observation which we may form upon language, that
where two related parts of a whole bear any proportion to each other, in numbers,
rank or consideration, there are always correlative terms invented, which answer to
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 394 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
both the parts, and express their mutual relation. If they bear no proportion to each
other, the term is only invented for the less, and marks its distinction from the whole.
Thus man and woman, master and servant, father and son, prince and subject,
stranger and citizen, are correlative terms. But the words seaman, carpenter, smith,
tailor, &c. have no correspondent terms, which express those who are no seamen, no
carpenters, &c. Languages differ very much with regard to the particular words where
this distinction obtains; and may thence afford very strong inferences, concerning the
manners and customs of different nations. The military government of the Roman
emperors had exalted the soldiery so high, that they balanced all the other orders of
the state: Hence miles and paganus became relative terms; a thing, till then, unknown
to ancient, and still so to modern languages. Modern superstition exalted the clergy so
high, that they overbalanced the whole state: Hence clergy and laity are terms
opposed in all modern languages; and in these alone. And from the same principles I
infer, that if the number of slaves bought by the Romans from foreign countries, had
not extremely exceeded those which were bred at home, verna would have had a
correlative, which would have expressed the former species of slaves. But these, it
would seem, composed the main body of the ancient slaves, and the latter were but a
few exceptions.
[22. ]Verna is used by Roman writers as a word equivalent to scurra [“a fashionable
city idler”], on account of the petulance and impudence of those slaves. Mart. lib. i.
ep. 42 [Martial (ad 40?–104?), Epigrams 1.41 in the Loeb edition]. Horace [Satires
2.6.66] also mentions the vernæ, procaces [“saucy slaves”]; and Petronius
[Satyricon], cap. 24. vernula urbanitas [one textual reading is urbanitatis vernulae
(“of the sophistication of the home-bred slave”)]. Seneca, de provid. cap. I.
vernularum licentia [On Providence 1.6; “Slave boys by their forwardness”].
[23. ]It is computed in the West Indies, that a stock of slaves grow worse five per
cent. every year, unless new slaves be bought to recruit them. They are not able to
keep up their number, even in those warm countries, where cloaths and provisions are
so easily got. How much more must this happen in European countries, and in or near
great cities?e I shall add, that, from the experience of our planters, slavery is as little
advantageous to the master as to the slave, wherever hired servants can be procured.
A man is obliged to cloath and feed his slave; and he does no more for his servant:
The price of the first purchase is, therefore, so much loss to him: not to mention, that
the fear of punishment will never draw so much labour from a slave, as the dread of
being turned off and not getting another service, will from a freeman.
[24. ]Corn. Nepos in vita Attici. [Lives of Illustrious Men, Atticus, sec. 13.] We may
remark, that Atticus’s estate lay chiefly in Epirus, which, being a remote, desolate
place, would render it profitable for him to rear slaves there.
[25. ]Lib. vii. [Geography 7.3.12.]
[26. ]In Midiam. p. 221, ex. edit. Aldi. [Against Meidias, secs. 45–50.]
[27. ]Panegyr. [Isocrates (436–338 bc), Panegyricus.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 395 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[28. ]Lib. vii. cap. 10. sub fin.
[29. ]Aristoph. Equites, I. 17. [Aristophanes (445?–380 bc), The Knights, 1. 17.] The
ancient scholiast remarks on this passage βαρβαρίζει ως δου?λος [he speaks
barbarically like a slave].
[30. ]In Amphobum orat. I. [Against Aphobus 1.9–11.]
[31. ]κλινοποιο?, makers of those beds which the ancients lay upon at meals.
[32. ]In vita Catonis [sec. 21].
[33. ]“Non temere ancillæ ejus rei causa comparantur ut pariant.” Digest. lib. v. tit. 3.
de hæred. petit. lex 27. [Hume is citing the Digest or Pandects of the emperor
Justinian. The translation used here is by S. P. Scott in The Civil Law, 17 vols.
(Cincinnati: The Central Trust Co., 1932). The first quotation reads: “it is not
customary for female slaves to be acquired for breeding purposes.”] The following
texts are to the same purpose, “Spadonem morbosum non esse, neque vitiosum, verius
mihi videtur; sed sanum esse, sicuti illum qui unum testiculum habet, qui etiam
generare potest.” Digest. lib. ii. tit. 1. de ædilitio edicto, lex 6. § 2. [The citation for
this and subsequent passages should be bk. 21, title 1; “A slave who has been
castrated is not, I think, diseased or defective, but sound; just as one who has but one
testicle, who is still capable of reproduction.”] “Sin autem quis ita spado sit, ut tam
necessaria pars corporis penitus absit, morbosus est.” Id. lex 7. [“Where, however, a
slave has been castrated in such a way that any part of his body required for the
purpose of generation is absolutely absent, he is considered to be diseased.”] His
impotence, it seems, was only regarded so far as his health or life might be affected by
it. In other respects, he was full as valuable. The same reasoning is employed with
regard to female slaves. “Quæritur de ea muliere quæ semper mortuos parit, an
morbosa sit? et ait Sabinus, si vulvæ vitio hoc contingit, morbosam esse.” Id. lex 14.
[“The question was asked whether a female slave was diseased who always brought
forth dead children. Sabinus says that if this was caused by an uterine affection, she
must be so considered.”] It had even been doubted, whether a woman pregnant was
morbid or vitiated; and it is determined, that she is sound, not on account of the value
of her offspring, but because it is the natural part or office of women to bear children.
“Si mulier prægnans venerit, inter omnes convenit sanam eam esse. Maximum enim
ac præcipuum munus fœminarum accipere ac tueri conceptum. Puerperam quoque
sanam esse; si modo nihil extrinsecus accedit, quod corpus ejus in aliquam
valetudinem immitteret. De sterili Cælius distinguere Trebatium dicit, ut si natura
sterilis sit, sana sit; si vitio corporis, contra.” Id. [“Where a female slave, who is
pregnant, is sold, it is held by all the authorities that she is sound, for it is the greatest
and most important function of a woman to conceive and preserve a child. A woman
in child-birth is also sound, provided nothing else happens which would cause her
some bodily illness. Caelius says Trebatius makes a distinction in the case of sterility,
for if a woman is sterile by nature, she is healthy, but if this occurs through some
defect of the body she is not.”)
[34. ]Tacit.ann. lib. xiv. cap. 43.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 396 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[35. ]The slaves in the great houses had little rooms assigned to them, called cellæ.
Whence the name of cell was transferred to the monk’s room in a convent. See farther
on this head, Just. Lipsius, Saturn. i. cap. 14. [Justus Lipsius (1547–1606). Hume is
probably referring to Saturnalium sermonum libri duo (1585), which discusses
Roman festivals and gladiatorial contests.] These form strong presumptions against
the marriage and propagation of the family slaves.
[36. ]Opera et Dies, lib. ii. 1. 24. also 1. 220. [Hesiod (eighth century bc), Works and
Days. See l. 405 and l. 602 in the Loeb edition.]
[37. ][Xenophon, On Estate Management 9.5.]
[38. ]Strabo, lib. viii. [8.5.4.]
[39. ]De ratione redituum. [Xenophon, Ways and Means 4.14.]
[40. ]See Cato de re rustica, cap. 56. Donatus in Phormion [the commentary of Aelius
Donatus (fourth century ad) on Terence’s Phormio], 1.i.9. Senecae epist. 80. [7–8].
[41. ]De re rust. cap. 10, 11.
[42. ]Lib. i. cap. 18.
[43. ]Lib. i. cap. 17.
[44. ]Lib. i. cap. 18. [On Agriculture 1.8.5.]
[45. ][Varro, On Agriculture 1.17.]
[46. ]Lib. xxxiii. cap. I. [Pliny the Elder, Natural History 33.6.26 in the Loeb edition.
The passage reads: “This is the progress achieved by our legions of slaves—a foreign
rabble in one’s home, so that an attendant to tell people’s names now has to be
employed even in the case of one’s slaves” (Loeb translation by H. Rackham).] So
likewise Tacitus, annal. lib. xiv. cap. 44.i
[47. ]Lib. ii. cap. 10. [6.]
[48. ]Pastoris duri est hic filius, ille bubulci. Juven. sat. 11. 151. [Juvenal, Satires
11.151: “One is the son of a hardy shepherd; another of the cattleman” (Loeb
translation by G. G. Ramsay).]
[49. ]Lib. i. cap. 8. [19.]
[50. ]De bel. civ. lib. i. [Appian, Roman History: The Civil Wars 1.7.]
[51. ]In vita Tib. & C. Gracchi. [Lives, in the life of Tiberius Gracchus 8.3.]
[52. ]To the same purpose is that passage of the elder Seneca, ex controversia 5. lib. v.
“Arata quondam populis rura, singulorum ergastulorum sunt; latiusque nunc villici,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 397 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
quam olim reges, imperant.” [Seneca the Elder (55? bc–ad 40?), The Controversies
5.5: “It is for all this that country once ploughed by whole peoples belongs to single
slave-farms and bailiffs have wider sway than kings” (Loeb translation by M.
Winterbottom).] “At nunc eadem,” says Pliny, “vincti pedes, damnatae manus,
inscripti vultus exercent.” Lib. xviii. cap. 3. [Pliny the Elder, Natural History 18.4 in
the Loeb edition: “But nowadays those agricultural operations are performed by
slaves with fettered ankles and by the hands of malefactors with branded faces” (Loeb
translation by H. Rackham).] So also Martial.
“Et sonet innumera compede Thuscus ager.” Lib. ix. ep. 23. [Martial, Epigrams 9.22
in the Loeb edition: “. . . and Tuscan fields clank with countless fettered slaves” (Loeb
translation by Walter C. A. Ker).] And Lucan.
“Tum longos jungere fines
Agrorum, et quondam duro sulcata Camilli,
Vomere et antiquas Curiorum passa ligones,
Longa sub ignotis extendere rura colonis.” Lib. i.
[Lucan, The Civil War 1. 167–70: “Next they stretched wide the boundaries of their
lands, till those acres, which once were furrowed by the iron plough of Camillus and
felt the spade of a Curius long ago, grew into vast estates tilled by foreign cultivators”
(Loeb translation by J. D. Duff).]
“Vincto fossore coluntur
Hesperiae segetes. ———” Lib. vii.
[The Civil War 7.402: “The corn-fields of Italy are tilled by chained labourers” (Loeb
translation by J. D. Duff).]
[53. ]Lib. iii. cap. 19. [Florus (second century ad), Epitome of Roman History 2.7 in
the Loeb edition.]
[54. ]Id. lib. iv. cap. 8. [Epitome of Roman History 2.18 in the Loeb edition.]
[55. ][Benoit de Maillet (1656–1738) wrote Description de l’Egypte (1735) and Idée
du gouvernement ancien et moderne de l’Egypte (1743).]
[56. ]Tacitus blames it. De morib. Germ. [Germany, sec. 19.]
[57. ]De fraterno amore. [Moralia, “On Brotherly Love,” sec. 18. The Loeb translator
(W. C. Helmbold) understands the text to say only that Attalus “was unwilling to
acknowledge as his own any of the children his wife had borne him,” i.e., by the
ceremony in which the father raises the child in his arms to acknowledge its
legitimacy. By this interpretation, the children of Attalus were not murdered, but
simply were not recognized as heirs to the throne, or, at worse, were disowned.]
Seneca also approves of the exposing of sickly infirm children. De ira [“On Anger”],
lib. i. cap. 15.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 398 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[58. ]Sext. Emp. lib. iii. cap. 24. [Sextus Empiricus (second or third century ad),
Outlines of Pyrrhonism 3.24.]
[59. ]De amore prolis. [Moralia, “On Affection for Offspring,” sec. 5. Plutarch’s point
is that the failure of poor men to raise their children is not an exception to the general
rule that parents naturally love their offspring, for since they cannot give their
children a good education, they do not wish them to become vicious and poor.]
[60. ]The practice of leaving great sums of money to friends, though one had near
relations, was common in Greece as well as Rome; as we may gather from Lucian.
This practice prevails much less in modern times; and Ben. Johnson’s Volpone is
therefore almost entirely extracted from ancient authors, and suits better the manners
of those times.
It may justly be thought, that the liberty of divorces in Rome was another
discouragement to marriage. Such a practice prevents not quarrels from humour, but
rather encreases them; and occasions also those from interest, which are much more
dangerous and destructive. See farther on this head, Part I. Essay XVIII. [This
probably should read essay XIX (“Of Polygamy and Divorces”).] Perhaps too the
unnatural lusts of the ancients ought to be taken into consideration, as of some
moment. [Hume refers in this final sentence to the practice of homosexuality.]
[61. ]De exp.Cyr. lib. vii. [The Expedition of Cyrus 7.6.]
[62. ]Demost.de falsa leg. [“On the Embassy,” sec. 158.] He calls it a considerable
sum.
[63. ]Thucyd. lib. iii. [History of the Peloponnesian War 3.17.]
[64. ]Lib. vi. cap. 37. [Histories 6.39 in the Loeb edition.]
[65. ]Tit. Liv. lib. xli. cap. 7. 13 & alibi passim. [Livy, History of Rome 41.7, 13, and
elsewhere throughout.]
[66. ]Appian.De bell. civ. lib. iv. [120.]
[67. ]Cæsar gave the centurions ten times the gratuity of the common soldiers, De
bello Gallico, lib. viii. [The Gallic War 8.4.] In the Rhodian cartel, mentioned
afterwards, no distinction in the ransom was made on account of ranks in the army.
[68. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xii. [The Library of History 12.59.] Thucyd. lib. iii. [92.]
[69. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xvi. [82.]
[70. ]In vitaTimol. [Lives, in the life of Timoleon, sec. 23.]
[71. ]Plin. lib. xviii. cap. 3. [Natural History 18.4 in the Loeb edition.] The same
author, in cap. 6. says, Verumque fatentibus latifundia perdidereItaliam; jam vero et
provincias. Sex domi semissemAfricæpossidebant, cum interfecit eosNeroprinceps.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 399 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[18.7 in the Loeb edition: “And if the truth be confessed, large estates have been the
ruin of Italy, and are now proving the ruin of the provinces too—half of Africa was
owned by six landlords, when the Emperor Nero put them to death” (Loeb translation
by H. Rackham).] In this view the barbarous butchery committed by the first Roman
emperors, was not, perhaps, so destructive to the public as we may imagine. These
never ceased till they had extinguished all the illustrious families, which had enjoyed
the plunder of the world, during the latter ages of the republic. The new nobles who
arose in their place, were less splendid, as we learn from Tacit.Ann. lib. iii. cap. 55.
[72. ]The ancient soldiers, being free citizens, above the lowest rank, were all married.
Our modern soldiers are either forced to live unmarried, or their marriages turn to
small account towards the encrease of mankind. A circumstance which ought,
perhaps, to be taken into consideration, as of some consequence in favour of the
ancients.
[73. ]Hist. lib. ii. cap. 44.
[74. ]As Abydus, mentioned by Livy, lib. xxxi. cap. 17, 18. and Polyb. lib. xvi. [34.]
As also the Xanthians, Appian.de bell. civil. lib. iv. [80.]
[75. ]In vitaArati. [Lives, in the life of Aratus, sec. 6.]
[76. ]Inst. lib. ii. cap. 6.m
[77. ]Diod. Sicul. lib. xx. [84.]
[78. ]Lysias, who was himself of the popular faction, and very narrowly escaped from
the thirty tyrants, says, that the Democracy was as violent a government as the
Oligarchy. Orat. 24. de statu popul. [In the Loeb edition, Oration 25: Defence Against
a Charge of Subverting the Democracy, sec. 27.]
[79. ]Cicero, Philip I. [Philippic 1. 1. Thrasybulus led the democratic forces that
overthrew the rule of the Thirty Tyrants and restored the democratic constitution to
Athens (404–403 bc).]
[80. ]As orat. 11. contraEratost.orat. 12. contraAgorat.orat. 15. pro Mantith. [In the
Loeb edition, Oration 12: Against Eratosthenes, Who Had Been One of the Thirty;
Oration 13: Against Agoratus; Oration 16: In Defense of Mantitheus.]
[81. ]Appian.de bell. civ. lib. ii. [2. 100. Hirtius was one of Caesar’s officers.]
[82. ]See Cæsar’s speech de bell. Catil. [Sallust, The War with Catiline, sec. 51.]
[83. ]Orat. 24. [See 25.19 in the Loeb edition.] And in orat. 29. [in the Loeb edition,
Oration 30: Against Nicomachus, secs. 13–14] he mentions the factious spirit of the
popular assemblies as the only cause why these illegal punishments should displease.
[84. ]Lib. iii. [83.]p
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 400 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[85. ]Plut.de virt. & fort.Alex. [Plutarch, Moralia, “On the Fortune or the Virtue of
Alexander.” Dionysius I, who was tyrant of Syracuse from 405 to 367 bc, is
mentioned at 1.9 and 2.1, but it is not immediately clear why Hume draws attention to
this essay.]
[86. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xviii, xix. [Agathocles (361–289 bc) was tyrant and king of
Syracuse. His deeds are described in detail in book 19.]
[87. ]Tit. Liv. xxxi, xxxiii, xxxiv.
[88. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xiv. [See 14.5. Diodorus doesn’t mention a specific number of
Athenians killed.] Isocrates says there were only 5000 banished. He makes the
number of those killed amount to 1500. Areop. [Areopagiticus, sec. 67.]
ÆschinescontraCtesiph. [Aeschines, Against Ctesiphon, sec. 235] assigns precisely
the same number. Seneca (de tranq. anim. cap. 5.) says 1300.
[89. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xv. [58.]
[90. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xiii. [48.]
[91. ]We shall mention from Diodorus Siculus alone a few massacres, which passed
in the course of sixty years, during the most shining age of Greece. There were
banished from Sybaris 500 of the nobles and their partizans; lib. xii. p. 77. ex
edit.Rhodomanni. Of Chians, 600 citizens banished; lib. xiii. p. 189. At Ephesus, 340
killed, 1000 banished; lib. xiii. p. 223. Of Cyrenians, 500 nobles killed, all the rest
banished; lib. xiv. p. 263. The Corinthians killed 120, banished 500; lib. xiv. p. 304.
Phæbidas the Spartan banished 300 Bæotians; lib. xv. p. 342. Upon the fall of the
Lacedæmonians, Democracies were restored in many cities, and severe vengeance
taken of the nobles, after the Greek manner. But matters did not end there. For the
banished nobles, returning in many places, butchered their adversaries at Phialæ, in
Corinth, in Megara, in Phliasia. In this last place they killed 300 of the people; but
these again revolting, killed above 600 of the nobles, and banished the rest; lib. xv. p.
357. In Arcadia 1400 banished, besides many killed. The banished retired to Sparta
and to Pallantium: The latter were delivered up to their countrymen, and all killed; lib.
xv. p. 373. Of the banished from Argos and Thebes, there were 509 in the Spartan
army; id. p. 374. Here is a detail of the most remarkable of Agathocles’s cruelties
from the same author. The people before his usurpation had banished 600 nobles; lib.
xix. p. 655. Afterwards that tyrant, in concurrence with the people, killed 4000 nobles,
and banished 6000; id. p. 647. He killed 4000 people at Gela; id. p. 741. By
Agathocles’s brother 8000 banished from Syracuse; lib. xx. p. 757. The inhabitants of
Ægesta, to the number of 40,000, were killed, man, woman, and child; and with
tortures, for the sake of their money; id. p. 802. All the relations, to wit, father,
brother, children, grandfather, of his Libyan army, killed; id. p. 803. He killed 7000
exiles after capitulation; id. p. 816. It is to be remarked, that Agathocles was a man of
great sense and courage,q and is not to be suspected of wanton cruelty, contrary to the
maxims of his age.
[92. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xviii. [8.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 401 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[93. ][Isocrates, To Philip, sec. 96: “Besides, you will find as many soldiers at your
service as you wish, for such is now the state of affairs in Hellas that it is easier to get
together a greater and stronger army from among those who wander in exile than from
those who live under their own polities” (Loeb translation by George Norlin). See also
Panegyricus, secs. 168 ff. on the evils of factional strife in the Greek cities and the
prospect of achieving concord through a common war on Persia.]
[94. ]Pag. 885. ex edit.Leunclav. [Banquet 4.29–32. Hume gives a loose paraphrase of
the text.]
[95. ]Orat. 29. inNicom. [Hume perhaps has in mind section 25 of the oration Against
Nicomachus, which speaks of putting citizens to death for peculation, or fraudulently
drawing off public property.]
[96. ]In order to recommend his client to the favour of the people, he enumerates all
the sums he had expended. When χορηγ?ς, 30 minas: Upon a chorus of men 20 minas;
ε?ς πυρριχιστ?ς, 8 minas; ?νδράσι χορηγω?ν, 50 minas; κυκλικω?? χορω??, 3 minas;
Seven times trierarch, where he spent 6 talents: Taxes, once 30 minas, another time
40; γυμνασιαρχω?ν, 12 minas; χορηγ?ς παιδικω?? χορω??, 15 minas; κωμω?δοι?ς
χορηγω?ν, 18 minas; πυρριχισται?ς ?γενείοις, 7 minas; τριήρει ?μιλλώμενος, 15
minas; ?ρχιθέωρος, 30 minas: In the whole ten talents 38 minas. [The Greek terms
refer to officers in the theater to whom money was paid—the leader of the chorus,
etc.] An immense sum for an Athenian fortune, and what alone would be esteemed
great riches, Orat. 20. [21.1–5.] It is true, he says, the law did not oblige him
absolutely to be at so much expence, not above a fourth. But without the favour of the
people, no body was so much as safe; and this was the only way to gain it. See farther,
orat. 24. de pop. statu. In another place, he introduces a speaker, who says that he had
spent his whole fortune, and an immense one, eighty talents, for the people. Orat. 25.
de prob. Evandri. [Oration 26: On the Scrutiny of Evandros.] The μ´ετοικοι, or
strangers, find, says he, if they do not contribute largely enough to the people’s fancy,
that they have reason to repent it. Orat. 30. contraPhil. [Oration 31: Against Philon.]
You may see with what care Demosthenes displays his expences of this nature, when
he pleads for himself de corona; and how he exaggerates Midias’s stinginess in this
particular, in his accusation of that criminal. All this, by the by, is a mark of a very
iniquitous judicature: And yet the Athenians valued themselves on having the most
legal and regular administration of any people in Greece.
[97. ]Panath. [Panathenaicus, sec. 126.]
[98. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xiv. [38.]
[99. ]Lib. i. [The Roman Antiquities 1.89.]
[100. ]The authorities cited above, are all historians, orators, and philosophers, whose
testimony is unquestioned. It is dangerous to rely upon writers who deal in ridicule
and satyr. What will posterity, for instance, infer from this passage of Dr. Swift: “I
told him, that in the kingdom of Tribnia (Britain) by the natives called Langdon
(London) where I had sojourned some time in my travels, the bulk of the people
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 402 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
consist, in a manner, wholly of discoverers, witnesses, informers, accusers,
prosecutors, evidences, swearers, together with their several subservient and subaltern
instruments, all under the colours, the conduct, and pay of ministers of state and their
deputies. The plots in that kingdom are usually the workmanship of those persons,”
&c. Gulliver’stravels [pt. 3, chap. 6; the second anagram should be Langden, for
England]. Such a representation might suit the government of Athens; not that of
England, which is remarkable even in modern times, for humanity, justice, and
liberty. Yet the Doctor’s satyr, though carried to extremes, as is usual with him, even
beyond other satyrical writers, did not altogether want an object. The Bishop of
Rochester, who was his friend, and of the same party, had been banished a little
before by bill of attainder, with great justice, but without such a proof as was legal, or
according to the strict forms of common law.
[101. ]Plutarchusin vitaSolon. [Lives, in the life of Solon, sec. 18.]
[102. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xviii. [18.18. Hume refers to the treaty of 322 bc in which the
Macedonian general Antipater imposed an oligarchic constitution on Athens.]
[103. ]Id. ibid.
[104. ]Id. ibid. [18.74. Hume refers to actions in 318 bc by Cassander, Antipater’s son
and successor.]
[105. ]Tit. Liv. lib. i. cap. 43.
[106. ]Lib. ii. [Anabasis of Alexander 2.24.] There were 8000 killed during the siege;
and the captives amounted to 30,000. Diodorus Siculus, lib. xvii. [46] says only
13,000: But he accounts for this small number, by saying that the Tyrians had sent
away before-hand part of their wives and children to Carthage.
[107. ]Lib. v. [History 5.97] he makes the number of the citizens amount to 30,000.
[108. ]Ib. v. [History 8.132 in the Loeb edition.]
[109. ]Orat. 33. advers.Diagit. [In the Loeb edition, Oration 32: Against Diogeiton,
sec. 25.]
[110. ]ContraAphob. p. 25. ex edit.Aldi. [Against Aphobus 1.58.]
[111. ]Id. p. 19. [1.9.]
[112. ]Id. ibid.
[113. ]Id. ibid. and ÆschinescontraCtesiph. [Against Ctesiphon, sec. 104.]
[114. ]Epist. adAttic. lib. iv. epist. 15. [Cicero, Letters to Atticus 4.15.]
[115. ]ContraVerr.orat. 3. [Against Verres 2.3.71 in the Loeb edition.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 403 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[116. ]See Essay IV. [“Of Interest.”]
[117. ]Lib. vii. [28.]
[118. ]Lib. xiii. [13.81. Agrigentum (or Acragas) was a large and affluent Hellenic
city in southwest Sicily.]
[119. ]Lib. xii. [12.9. Sybaris had been a powerful and wealthy Hellenic city in
southern Italy prior to its destruction in 510 bc]
[120. ]Oecon. [On Estate Management 15.10–11. For Columella’s suggestion that the
observations of Xenophon’s Ischomachus apply only to a more primitive time, see On
Agriculture 11.5.]
[121. ]See Part I. Essay XI. [This is probably a reference to “Of Civil Liberty.” Some
earlier editions read “Essay XII.”]
[122. ]Ælii Lamprid.in vitaHeliogab. cap. 26. [Aelius Lampridius (fourth century ad),
Augustan History, in the life of Heliogabalus, sec. 26. Heliogabalus (or Elagabalus)
was Roman emperor from ad 218 to 222.]
[123. ]In general, there is more candour and sincerity in ancient historians, but less
exactness and care, than in the moderns. Our speculative factions, especially those of
religion, throw such an illusion over our minds, that men seem to regard impartiality
to their adversaries and to heretics, as a vice or weakness: But the commonness of
books, by means of printing, has obliged modern historians to be more careful in
avoiding contradictions and incongruities. Diodorus Siculus is a good writer, but it is
with pain I see his narration contradict, in so many particulars, the two most authentic
pieces of all Greek history, to wit, Xenophon’s expedition, and Demosthenes’s
orations. Plutarch and Appian seem scarce ever to have read Cicero’s epistles.
[124. ]Lib. xii. [9.]
[125. ]Lib. vi. [Geography 6.1.13.]
[126. ]Lib. xiii. [13.84. Agrigentum was captured and pillaged by the Carthaginians in
406 bc]
[127. ]Diogenes Laertius (in vitaEmpedoclis) says, that Agrigentum contained only
800,000 inhabitants. [Diogenes Laertius (third century ad?), Lives of Eminent
Philosophers, bk. 8, chap. 2: “Empedocles,” sec. 63.]
[128. ]Idyll. 17. [Theocritus (300?–260? bc), Idyls, 17: The Panegyric of Ptolemy, sec.
80. “The cities builded therein are three hundreds and three thousands and three tens
of thousands, and threes twain and nines three”; in The Greek Bucolic Poets,
translated by J. M. Edmonds (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960).]
[129. ]Lib. i. [31.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 404 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[130. ]Id. ibid.
[131. ]Orat. funebris. [Funeral Oration, secs. 27–28.]
[132. ]Lib. ii. [24.]
[133. ]The country that supplied this number, was not above a third of Italy, viz. the
Pope’s dominions, Tuscany, and a part of the kingdom of Naples: But perhaps in
those early times there were very few slaves, except in Rome, or the great cities.t
[134. ]Lib. ii. [5.]
[135. ]Celtica. [The Gallic History, sec. 2.]
[136. ]Plutarch (in vitaCæs. [sec. 15]) makes the number that Cæsar fought with
amount to three millions; Julian (inCæsaribus) to two. [Julian (ad 331–363; Roman
emperor from 360 to 363), The Caesars 321a.]
[137. ]Lib. ii. cap. 47. [Velleius Paterculus (19? bc–after ad 30), Roman History 2.47.]
[138. ]Pliny, lib. vii. cap. 25. says, that Cæsar used to boast, that there had fallen in
battle against him one million one hundred and ninety-two thousand men, besides
those who perished in the civil wars. It is not probable, that that conqueror could ever
pretend to be so exact in his computation. But allowing the fact, it is likely, that the
Helvetii, Germans, and Britons, whom he slaughtered, would amount to near a half of
the number.u
[139. ]Diod. Sic. lib. ii. [2.5. The Loeb text reads 120,000 foot soldiers and 12,000
cavalry.]
[140. ]Plutarchin vitaDionis. [Lives, in the life of Dion, secs. 23–29.]
[141. ]Strabo, lib. vi. [6.2.7.]
[142. ]Apolog.Socr. [Apology of Socrates 29d.]
[143. ]Argos seems also to have been a great city; for Lysias contents himself with
saying that it did not exceed Athens. Orat. 34. [“Against the Subversion of the
Ancestral Constitution of Athens,” sec. 34.]
[144. ]Lib. vi. [33.] See also Plutarchin vitaNiciæ. [Lives, in the life of Nicias, sec.
17.]
[145. ]Orat. contraVerrem, lib. iv. cap. 52. Strabo, lib. vi. [6.2.4] says, it was twentytwo
miles in compass. But then we are to consider, that it contained two harbours
within it; one of which was a very large one, and might be regarded as a kind of bay.
[146. ]Lib. vi. cap. 20. [Deipnosophistai (The banquet of the learned) 6.272.
Athenaeus of Naucrastis flourished c. ad 200.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 405 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[147. ]Demosthenes assigns 20,000; contraAristag. [Against Aristogeiton 1.50–51.]
[148. ]Lib. v. [97.]
[149. ]Lib. viii. [72.]
[150. ]Lib. ii. [13.] Diodorus Siculus’s account perfectly agrees, lib. xii. [40.]
[151. ]Xenophon. Mem. lib. ii. [Memorabilia 3.6.14 in the Loeb edition.]
[152. ]Lib. ii. [13.]
[153. ]De ratione red. [Ways and Means 2.6.]
[154. ]We are to observe, that when Dionysius Halycarnassæus [4.13] says, that if we
regard the ancient walls of Rome, the extent of that city will not appear greater than
that of Athens; he must mean the Acropolis and high town only. No ancient author
ever speaks of the Pyræum, Phalerus, and Munychia, as the same with Athens. Much
less can it be supposed, that Dionysius would consider the matter in that light, after
the walls of Cimon and Pericles were destroyed, and Athens was entirely separated
from these other towns. This observation destroys all Vossius’s reasonings, and
introduces common sense into these calculations.
[155. ]Athen. lib. vi. [272.]
[156. ]De rep.Athen. [The Constitution of the Athenians, secs. 10–12. Xenophon’s
authorship of this work is doubted by modern scholars. For a text and commentary,
see Hartvig Frisch, The Constitution of the Athenians (Copenhagen: Gyldendal,
1942).]
[157. ]Philip. 3. [Third Philippic, sec. 3.]
[158. ]Sticho. [Stichus, act 3, sc. 1.]
[159. ]ContraTimarch. [Against Timarchus, sec. 42.]
[160. ]Orat. 11. [See Oration 12: Against Eratosthenes, sec. 19.]
[161. ]ContraAphob. [1.9.]
[162. ]Ibid.
[163. ]Lib. vii. [7.27. The desertion of the slaves at Decelea occurred in 413 bc]
[164. ]De rat. red. [4.13–32.]
[165. ]De classibus. [On the Navy-Boards, sec. 19.]
[166. ]Lib. ii. cap. 62.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 406 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[167. ]De rat. red. [Ways and Means 4.14.]
[168. ]ContraAphobum. [1.9.]
[169. ]Lib. viii. [40.]
[170. ]Plutarch. in vitaLycurg. [Lives, in the life of Lycurgus, sec. 8.]
[171. ][The 1777 edition of Hume’s Essays reads 78,000, which Green and Grose,
following earlier editions, change to 780,000. This larger number is required by
Hume’s argument. Hume is opposing those who believe that Athens had 400,000
male slaves, as the text of Athenaeus indicates. If this text were correct, the ratio of
male Athenian citizens to male slaves would be about 1 to 20. The same ratio applied
to Sparta, which had 39,000 male citizens, would yield more than 780,000 male
slaves. Since male slaves would have been about one-fourth of all slaves, the total
number of slaves in Sparta, using the ratio of Athenaeus, would be more than
3,120,000—a number that Hume regards as impossible.]
[172. ]Lib. iv. [80.]
[173. ]The same author affirms [The Banquet of the Learned 6.272], that Corinth had
once 460,000 slaves, Ægina 470,000. But the foregoing arguments hold stronger
against these facts, which are indeed entirely absurd and impossible. It is however
remarkable, that Athenæus cites so great an authority as Aristotle for this last fact:
And the scholiast on Pindar mentions the same number of slaves in Ægina.
[174. ]Lib. ii. [14–16.]
[175. ]Thucyd. lib. ii. [17.]
[176. ]Demost.contraLept. [Demosthenes, Against Leptines, secs. 31–33.] The
Athenians brought yearly from Pontus 400,000 medimni or bushels of corn, as
appeared from the custom-house books. And this was the greater part of their
importation of corn. This by the by is a strong proof that there is some great mistake
in the foregoing passage of Athenæus. For Attica itself was so barren of corn, that it
produced not enough even to maintain the peasants. Tit. Liv. lib. xliii. cap. 6.y And
400,000 medimni would scarcely feed 100,000 men during a twelvemonth. Lucian, in
his navigium sive vota [The Ship or the Wishes, secs. 4–6], says, that a ship, which, by
the dimensions he gives, seems to have been about the size of our third rates, carried
as much corn as would maintain all Attica for a twelve-month. But perhaps Athens
was decayed at that time; and besides, it is not safe to trust to such loose rhetorical
calculations.
[177. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xx. [84.]
[178. ]Isocr.paneg. [sec. 64.]
[179. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xvii. [14.]z When Alexander attacked Thebes, we may safely
conclude, that almost all the inhabitants were present. Whoever is acquainted with the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 407 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
spirit of the Greeks, especially of the Thebans, will never suspect, that any of them
would desert their country, when it was reduced to such extreme peril and distress. As
Alexander took the town by storm, all those who bore arms were put to the sword
without mercy; and they amounted only to 6000 men. Among these were some
strangers and manumitted slaves. The captives, consisting of old men, women,
children, and slaves, were sold, and they amounted to 30,000. We may therefore
conclude that the free citizens in Thebes, of both sexes and all ages, were near 24,000;
the strangers and slaves about 12,000. These last, we may observe, were somewhat
fewer in proportion than at Athens; as is reasonable to imagine from this
circumstance, that Athens was a town of more trade to support slaves, and of more
entertainment to allure strangers. It is also to be remarked, that thirty-six thousand
was the whole number of people, both in the city of Thebes, and the neighbouring
territory: A very moderate number, it must be confessed; and this computation, being
founded on facts which appear indisputable, must have great weight in the present
controversy. The above-mentioned number of Rhodians too were all the inhabitants of
the island, who were free, and able to bear arms.
[180. ]Hist. Græc. lib. vii. [Hellenica 7.2.1.]
[181. ]Id. lib. vii. [See 5.3.1, where it is reported that the city of Phlius has more than
five thousand men. Hume may be adding those who were exiled at the time.]
[182. ]Polyb. lib. ii. [56.]
[183. ]Polyc. lib. ix. cap. 20. [The reference is to Polybius, Histories 9.26a in the
Loeb edition. Polyc. is no doubt a misprint. Some earlier editions of Hume’s Essays
read Polyb.]
[184. ]Lysias, orat. 34. [secs. 7–8.]
[185. ]Vopiscusin vitaAurel. [Hume’s reference is to one of a collection of
biographies of Roman rulers from ad 117 to 284. This collection has been known
since the early seventeenth century as the Historia Augusta (Augustan history).
Tradition holds that the biographies were written by six different authors in the late
third or early fourth centuries. The Life of Aurelian was traditionally ascribed to
Flavius Vopiscus. There has been considerable debate over the past century as to both
the authorship of the biographies and their dates of composition. The Loeb edition is:
The Scriptores Historiae Augustae. 3 vols. With an English Translation by David
Magie. (London: W. Heinemann, 1921–32).]
[186. ][Publius Victor is the name prefixed to an enumeration of the principal
buildings and monuments of ancient Rome. The usual title of the work, which was
first printed in 1505, was De Regionibus Urbis Romae (On the regions of the city of
Rome). For the problems that arise in using this source to make population estimates
for Rome, see G. Hermansen, “The Population of Imperial Rome: The Regionaries,”
Historia 27 (1978): 129–68.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 408 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[187. ]De rep.Laced. [Constitution of the Lacedaemonians 1.1.] This passage is not
easily reconciled with that of Plutarch above, who says, that Sparta had 9000 citizens.
[188. ]Polyb. lib. ix. cap. 20. [9.26a in the Loeb edition of the Histories.]
[189. ]Diod. Sic. lib. xviii. [24.]
[190. ]Legat. [The text of Polybius is complete for books 1–5, but for the other 34 we
have to rely on various collections of excerpts. Hume’s reference here is to one of the
most important of these collections, which was made on the instructions of the
Byzantine emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus (VII). This collection was organized
under various headings, one of which was “de legationibus gentium ad Romanos”
(Embassies of foreign peoples to the Romans). It is to this collection that Legat.
refers. In modern texts of Polybius’s Histories, the passage is found at 29.24.8. It
comes in an account by Polybius of a speech which he had himself delivered to the
Achaean assembly in 170 bc, urging that it honor the request from the kings of Egypt
for some troops to assist in their war against Antiochus IV of Syria. Opponents of the
request maintained that the troops might be needed to help Rome in its war against
Perseus of Macedonia. Polybius replied that the Romans did not need help from the
Achaeans, but that if they did ask for it, a force of even thirty or forty thousand men
could easily be raised.]
[191. ]InAchaicis. [Pausanias (flourished around ad 150), Description of Greece,
“Achaia” 15.7.]
[192. ]Tit. Liv. lib. xxxiv. cap. 51. PlatoinCritone. [Crito 53d.]
[193. ]Lib. vii. [4.3 in the Loeb edition.]
[194. ]Lib. vii. [126.]
[195. ]Tit. Liv. lib. xlv. cap. 34.
[196. ]Lib. ix. cap. 5. [The reference is to Marcus Junianus Justinus (third century
ad?) and his epitome in Latin of Trogus Pompeius’s Historiae Philippicae (Philippic
history).]
[197. ]Lib. iv. [13.]
[198. ]Lib. x. [32.]
[199. ]Satyr. iii. l. 269, 270.
[200. ]Strabo, liv. v. [see 5.3.7] says, that the emperor Augustus prohibited the raising
houses higher than seventy feet. In another passage, lib. xvi. he speaks of the houses
of Rome as remarkably high. See also to the same purpose Vitruvius, lib. ii. cap. 8.
[Vitruvius (first century bc), On Architecture 2.8.17.] Aristides the sophist, in his
oration ε?ς Pώμην [Publius Aelius Aristides (ad 117–180?), To Rome. Loeb edition in
preparation], says, that Rome consisted of cities on the top of cities; and that if one
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 409 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
were to spread it out, and unfold it, it would cover the whole surface of Italy. Where
an author indulges himself in such extravagant declamations, and gives so much into
the hyperbolical style, one knows not how far he must be reduced. But this reasoning
seems natural: If Rome was built in so scattered a manner as Dionysius says, and ran
so much into the country, there must have been very few streets where the houses
were raised so high. It is only for want of room, that any body builds in that
inconvenient manner.
[201. ]Lib. ii. epist. 16. lib. v. epist. 6. [Pliny the Younger, Letters 2.17 in the Loeb
edition and 5.6.] It is true, Pliny there describes a country-house: But since that was
the idea which the ancients formed of a magnificent and convenient building, the
great men would certainly build the same way in town. “In laxitatem ruris excurrunt”
[“as if they were country houses” (Loeb translation by Richard M. Gummere)], says
Seneca of the rich and voluptuous, epist. 114. Valerius Maximus, lib. iv. cap. 4.
speaking of Cincinnatus’s field of four acres, says, “Auguste se habitare nunc putat,
cujus domus tantum patet quantum Cincinnati rura patuerant.” [Valerius Maximus
(first century ad), Facta et Dicta Memorabilia (Memorable deeds and sayings) 4.4:
“He counts himself to live splendidly now, whose house stands upon as much ground
as all Cincinnatus’s farm contained.”] To the same purpose see lib. xxxvi. cap. 15.
also lib. xviii. cap. 2.
[202. ][Pietro Santi Bartoli (c. 1635–1700) was a celebrated Italian engraver and
painter. He is known chiefly for his engraved illustrations of ancient art from the
catacombs and the ruins of Rome.]
[203. ]Vitruv. lib. v. cap. 11. Tacit. annal. lib. xi. cap. 3. Sueton.in vitaOctav. [Lives of
the Caesars, in The Deified Augustus] cap. 72, &c.
[204. ]“Moenia ejus (Romæ) collegere ambitu imperatoribus, censoribusque
Vespasianis, A. U. C. 828. pass. xiii. MCC. complexa montes septem, ipsa dividitur
in regiones quatuordecim, compita earum 265. Ejusdem spatii mensura, currente a
milliario in capite Rom. Fori statuto, ad singulas portas, quæ sunt hodie numero 37,
ita ut duodecim portæ semel numerentur, prætereanturque ex veteribus septem, quæ
esse desierunt, efficit passuum per directum 30,775. Ad extrema veto tectorum cum
castris prætoriis ab eodem Milliario, per vicos omnium viarum, mensura collegit
paulo amplius septuaginta millia passuum. Quo si quis altitudinem tectorum addat,
dignam profecto, æstimationem concipiat, fateaturque nullius urbis magnitudinem in
toto orbe potuisse ei comparari.” Plin. lib. iii. cap. 5. [Pliny, Natural History
3.5.66–67: “The area surrounded by its walls at the time of the principate and
censorship of the Vespasians, in the 826th year of its foundation, measured 13 miles
and 200 yards in circumference, embracing seven hills. It is itself divided into
fourteen regions, with 265 crossways with their guardian Lares. If a straight line is
drawn from the milestone standing at the head of the Roman Forum to each of the
gates, which to-day number thirty-seven (provided that the Twelve Gates be counted
only as one each and the seven of the old gates that exist no longer be omitted), the
result is a total of 20 miles 765 yards in a straight line. But the total length of all the
ways through the districts from the same milestone to the extreme edge of the
buildings, taking in the Praetorians’ Camp, amounts to a little more than 60 miles. If
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 410 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
one were further to take into account the height of the buildings, a very fair estimate
would be formed, that would bring us to admit that there has been no city in the whole
world that could be compared to Rome in magnitude.” (Loeb translation by H.
Rackham.) The Loeb Latin text reads “20,765 paces,” which Rackham translates as
20 miles 765 yards. Hume obviously follows a different manuscript tradition.]
All the best manuscripts of Pliny read the passage as here cited, and fix the compass
of the walls of Rome to be thirteen miles. The question is, What Pliny means by
30,775 paces, and how that number was formed? The manner in which I conceive it,
is this. Rome was a semicircular area of thirteen miles circumference. The Forum, and
consequently the Milliarium, we know, was situated on the banks of the Tyber, and
near the center of the circle, or upon the diameter of the semicircular area. Though
there were thirty-seven gates to Rome, yet only twelve of them had straight streets,
leading from them to the Milliarium. Pliny, therefore, having assigned the
circumference of Rome, and knowing that that alone was not sufficient to give us a
just notion of its surface, uses this farther method. He supposes all the streets, leading
from the Milliarium to the twelve gates, to be laid together into one straight line, and
supposes we run along that line, so as to count each gate once: In which case, he says,
that the whole line is 30,775 paces: Or, in other words, that each street or radius of the
semicircular area is upon an average two miles and a half; and the whole length of
Rome is five miles, and its breadth about half as much, besides the scattered suburbs.
Pere Hardouin [Jean Hardouin (1646–1729) published in 1685 an edition of Pliny’s
Natural History, which was reissued in 1723 and later with annotations] understands
this passage in the same manner; with regard to the laying together the several streets
of Rome into one line, in order to compose 30,775 paces: But then he supposes, that
streets led from the Milliarium to every gate, and that no street exceeded 800 paces in
length. But (1.) a semicircular area, whose radius was only 800 paces, could never
have a circumference near thirteen miles, the compass of Rome as assigned by Pliny.
A radius of two miles and a half forms very nearly that circumference. (2.) There is an
absurdity in supposing a city so built as to have streets running to its center from
every gate in its circumference. These streets must interfere as they approach. (3.)
This diminishes too much from the greatness of ancient Rome, and reduces that city
below even Bristol or Rotterdam.
The sense which Vossius in his Observationes variæ [see note 3 to this essay] puts on
this passage of Pliny, errs widely in the other extreme. One manuscript of no
authority, instead of thirteen miles, has assigned thirty miles for the compass of the
walls of Rome. And Vossius understands this only of the curvilinear part of the
circumference; supposing, that as the Tyber formed the diameter, there were no walls
built on that side. But (1.) this reading is allowed to be contrary to almost all the
manuscripts. (2.) Why should Pliny, a concise writer, repeat the compass of the walls
of Rome in two successive sentences? (3.) Why repeat it with so sensible a variation?
(4.) What is the meaning of Pliny’s mentioning twice the Milliarium, if a line was
measured that had no dependence on the Milliarium? (5.) Aurelian’s wall is said by
Vopiscus to have been drawn laxiore ambitu [“in a wider circuit”], and to have
comprehended all the buildings and suburbs on the north side of the Tyber; yet its
compass was only fifty miles; and even here critics suspect some mistake or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 411 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
corruption in the text; since the walls, which remain, and which are supposed to be the
same with Aurelian’s, exceed not twelve miles. It is not probable, that Rome would
diminish from Augustus to Aurelian. It remained still the capital of the same empire;
and none of the civil wars in that long period, except the tumults on the death of
Maximus and Balbinus, ever affected the city. Caracalla is said by Aurelius Victor
[Sextus Aurelius Victor, whose history of the caesars was published around ad 360] to
have encreased Rome. (6.) There are no remains of ancient buildings, which mark any
such greatness of Rome. Vossius’s reply to this objection seems absurd, that the
rubbish would sink sixty or seventy feet under ground. It appears from Spartian (in
vita Severi) that the five-mile stone in via Lavicana was out of the city. [Aelius
Spartianus was traditionally regarded as the author of the life of Severus in the
Historia Augusta.] (7.) Olympiodorus [ad 380?–425, whose twenty-two books of
history are lost but are summarized by Photius] and Publius Victor fix the number of
houses in Rome to be betwixt forty and fifty thousand. (8.) The very extravagance of
the consequences drawn by this critic, as well as Lipsius [probably in Lipsius’s De
Magnitudine Romana Libri quatuor (Four books on the size of Rome)], if they be
necessary, destroys the foundation on which they are grounded: That Rome contained
fourteen millions of inhabitants; while the whole kingdom of France contains only
five, according to his computation, &c.
The only objection to the sense which we have affixed above to the passage of Pliny,
seems to lie in this, That Pliny, after mentioning the thirty-seven gates of Rome,
assigns only a reason for suppressing the seven old ones, and says nothing of the
eighteen gates, the streets leading from which terminated, according to my opinion,
before they reached the Forum. But as Pliny was writing to the Romans, who
perfectly knew the disposition of the streets, it is not strange he should take a
circumstance for granted, which was so familiar to every body. Perhaps too, many of
these gates led to wharfs upon the river.
[205. ]Ex monument. Ancyr. [Hume’s reference is to the Emperor Augustus’s account
of his public acts, which was engraved upon bronze tablets before the emperor’s
mausoleum in Rome as well as on the walls of many of the temples of Augustus
throughout the empire. The best surviving version—the Monumentum
Ancyranum—was inscribed on the temple of Rome and Augustus at Ancyra. This
document is reproduced in the Loeb edition as Res Gestae Divi Augusti (The acts of
Augustus), translated by Frederick W. Shipley. The passage cited by Hume is in
section 15 of this edition.]
[206. ]Tusc. Quæst. lib. iii. cap. 48. [Tusculan Disputations 3.20 (48) in the Loeb
edition.]
[207. ]Licinius apud Sallust. hist. frag. lib. iii. [This reference is to Sallust’s Histories,
which survives only in fragments (see 3.48.19 in the standard edition by
Maurenbrecher). The passage cited by Hume is in a demogogic speech attributed to C.
Licinius Macer, who was tribune of the plebs in 73 bc Licinius refers to the allotment
of 5 modii of corn per head and says: “They have valued your freedom at five modii
each.”]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 412 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[208. ]Nicolaus Hortensius de re frumentaria Roman. [Nicolaus Hortensius, “On the
Provision of Corn at Rome.” No information could be located about this author and
book.]
[209. ]Not to take the people too much from their business, Augustus ordained the
distribution of corn to be made only thrice a-year: But the people finding the monthly
distributions more convenient, (as preserving, I suppose, a more regular œconomy in
their family) desired to have them restored. Sueton. August. cap. 40. Had not some of
the people come from some distance for their corn, Augustus’s precaution seems
superfluous.
[210. ]Sueton. in Jul. [The deified Julius] cap. 41.
[211. ]In vita Neronis. [Lives of the Caesars, in the life of Nero, chap. 39.]
[212. ]Sueton. Aug. cap. 42.
[213. ]Lib. iv. cap. 5. [Herodian (third century ad), History of the Empire from the
Time of Marcus Aurelius 4.3.7 in the Loeb edition.]
[214. ]Lib. xvii. [52.]
[215. ]Quintus Curtius says, its walls were ten miles in circumference, when founded
by Alexander; lib. iv. cap. 8. [History of Alexander 4.8.] Strabo, who had travelled to
Alexandria, as well as Diodorus Siculus, says it was scarce four miles long, and in
most places about a mile broad; lib. 17. [1.8.] Pliny says it resembled a Macedonian
cassock, stretching out in the corners; lib. v. cap. 10. [5.11 in the Loeb edition.]
Notwithstanding this bulk of Alexandria, which seems but moderate, Diodorus
Siculus, speaking of its circuit as drawn by Alexander (which it never exceeded, as we
learn from Ammianus Marcellinus [(fourth century ad), History of Rome from Nerva
to Valens], lib. xxii. cap. 16.) says it was μεγέθει διαφέροντα, extremely great, ibid.
[17.52.] The reason which he assigns for its surpassing all cities in the world (for he
excepts not Rome) is, that it contained 300,000 free inhabitants. He also mentions the
revenues of the kings, to wit, 6000 talents, as another circumstance to the same
purpose: No such mighty sum in our eyes, even though we make allowance for the
different value of money. What Strabo says of the neighbouring country, means only
that it was well peopled, ο?κούμενα καλω?ς. Might not one affirm, without any great
hyperbole, that the whole banks of the river from Gravesend to Windsor are one city?
[Gravesend is some twenty-five miles east of London on the Thames River, and
Windsor is some twenty miles west.] This is even more than Strabo says of the banks
of the lake Mareotis, and of the canal to Canopus. It is a vulgar saying in Italy, that
the king of Sardinia has but one town in Piedmont; for it is all a town. Agrippa, in
Josephusde belloJudaic. lib. ii. cap. 16. [Flavius Josephus (first century ad), The
Jewish War 2.385 in the Loeb edition] to make his audience comprehend the
excessive greatness of Alexandria, which he endeavours to magnify, describes only
the compass of the city as drawn by Alexander: A clear proof that the bulk of the
inhabitants were lodged there, and that the neighbouring country was no more than
what might be expected about all great towns, very well cultivated, and well peopled.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 413 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[216. ]Lib. xvii. [52.]
[217. ]He says ?λεύθεροι [“free people” or “free residents”], not πολι?ται, which last
expression must have been understood of citizens alone, and grown men.
[218. ]Lib. iv. cap. 1. πάσης πόλεως. Politian [the Latin translation of Herodian by
Angelus Politian (1454–94)] interprets it “ædibus majoribus etiam reliqua urbe”
[“with a palace greater even than the rest of the city”].
[219. ]He says (in Nerone, cap. 30.) that a portico or piazza of it was 3000 feet long;
“tanta laxitas ut porticus triplices milliarias haberet.” [Life of Nero 6.31: “ . . . it was
so extensive that it had a triple colonnade a mile long” (Loeb translation by J. C.
Rolfe).] He cannot mean three miles. For the whole extent of the house from the
Palatine to the Esquiline was not near so great. So when Vopisc. in Aureliano
mentions a portico in Sallust’s gardens, which he calls porticus milliarensis, it must
be understood of a thousand feet. [Vopiscus, The Deified Aurelian, sec. 49, in
Scriptores Historiae Augustae.] So also Horace:
“Nulla decempedis
Metata privatis opacam
Porticus exciplebat Arcton.”
Lib. ii. ode 15.
[Horace, Odes 2.15: “No private citizen had a portico measuring its tens of feet, lying
open to the shady north” (Loeb translation by C. E. Bennett).]
So also in lib. i. satyr. 8.
“Mille pedes in fronte, trecentos cippus in agrum
Hic dabat.”
[Horace, Satires 1.8.12: “Here a pillar assigned a thousand feet frontage and three
hundred of depth” (Loeb translation by H. Rushton Fairclough).]
[220. ]Plinius, lib. xxxvi. cap. 15. “Bis vidimus urbem totam cingi domibus
principum, Caii ac Neronis.” [Natural History 36.24 in the Loeb edition: “Twice have
we seen the whole city girdled by imperial palaces, those of Gaius and Nero” (Loeb
translation by D. E. Eichholz).]
[221. ]Lib. ii. cap. 15. [Herodian, History of the Empire 2.4.6 in the Loeb edition.]
[222. ]In Aurelian. cap. 48.
[223. ]Lib. xii. cap. 2. [Histories 12.4.5–14 in the Loeb edition. Hume gives a loose
paraphrase of the text rather than an exact translation.]
[224. ]Lib. ix. cap. 10. His expression is ?νθρωπος, not πολίτης; inhabitant, not
citizen.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 414 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[225. ]Lib. vi. cap. 28. [Natural History 6.30 (122) in the Loeb edition.]
[226. ]Lib. xvii. [Geography 17.3.15.]
[227. ]Such were Alexandria, Antioch, Carthage, Ephesus, Lyons, &c. in the Roman
empire. Such are even Bourdeaux, Tholouse, Dijon, Rennes, Rouen, Aix, &c. in
France; Dublin, Edinburgh, York, in the British dominions.
[228. ]Vol. ii. sect. 16. [Réflexions Critiques sur la Poësie et sur la Peinture
2.16.298–99; Critical Reflections on Poetry and Painting (London, 1748),
2.16.209–10. Hume is translating from the French text.]
[229. ]Sat. 6. [Satires 6.522–27: “In winter she will go down to the river of a morning,
break the ice, and plunge three times into the Tiber.” Several lines follow, which are
quoted in Latin by Dubos but are omitted by Hume, perhaps out of a certain delicacy
or modesty: “et ipsis verticibus timidum caput abluet, inde superbi totum regis agrum
nuda ac tremibunda cruentis erepet genibus” (“dipping her trembling head even in its
whirling waters, and crawling out thence naked and shivering, she will creep with
bleeding knees right across the field of Tarquin the Proud” (Loeb translation by G. G.
Ramsay).]
[230. ]Lib. iv. [5.25 in the Loeb edition. Hume’s rendering of the text is part
translation and part summary.]
[231. ][Satyricon, sec. 19.]
[232. ]De generat. anim. lib. ii. [Generation of Animals 2.8 (748a 27).]
[233. ]Lib. iv. [1.2.]
[234. ]Trist. lib. iii. eleg. 9. [Tristia 3.10 in the Loeb edition.] De Ponto [Letters from
Pontus], lib. iv. eleg. 7, 9, 10.
[235. ][See Tournefort, A Voyage into the Levant.]
[236. ]Lib. iv. cap. 21.
[237. ]Lib. i. cap. 2. [On Agriculture 1.2.4.]
[238. ]Lib. iii. [1.2.]
[239. ]The warm southern colonies also become more healthful: And it is remarkable,
that in the Spanish histories of the first discovery and conquest of these countries,
they appear to have been very healthful; being then well peopled and cultivated. No
account of the sickness or decay of Cortes’s or Pizarro’s small armies.
[240. ]Lib. i. cap. 1. [On Agriculture 1.1.5. There were two Sasernas, father and son,
who wrote in Latin on husbandry. They are cited frequently by Columella and Varro.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 415 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[241. ]He seems to have lived about the time of the younger Africanus; lib. i. cap. 1.
[The citation is probably Columella, On Agriculture 1.1.]
[242. ][See Benoît de Maillet (1659–1738), Description de l’Égypte (Paris, 1735).]
[243. ]Xenoph. Exp. [Expedition of Cyrus] lib. vii. Polyb. lib. iv. cap. 45.
[244. ]Ovid. passim, &c., [Here and there in Ovid’s works.] Strabo, lib. vii.
[245. ]Polyb. lib. ii. cap. 12.
[246. ]De Bello Gallico, lib. vi. [The Gallic War 6.23.]
[247. ]De Moribus Germ. [Germania.]
[248. ]Lib. vii.
[249. ]Lib. iii. cap. 47. [History 3.14.6 in the Loeb edition.]
[250. ]Cæsarde Bello Gallico, lib. xvi. [The Gallic War 6.13–14 in the Loeb edition.]
Strabo, lib. vii. [2.1] says, the Gauls were not much more improved than the Germans.
[251. ]Celt. pars 1. [Appian, Roman History, bk. 6, “The Gallic History” 1.2.]
[252. ]Lib. v. [25.]
[253. ]Ancient Gaul was more extensive than modern France.
[254. ]Cæsarde Bello Gallico, lib. vi.
[255. ]Id. ibid.
[256. ]Lib. iv. [Geography 4.1.2.]
[257. ]De Bello Gallico, lib. ii. [See 2.4. The numbers of forces given in the Loeb
edition add up to 306,000.]
[258. ]It appears from Cæsar’s account, that the Gauls had no domestic slaves,ii who
formed a different order from the Plebes. The whole common people were indeed a
kind of slaves to the nobility, as the people of Poland are at this day: And a nobleman
of Gaul had sometimes ten thousand dependents of this kind. Nor can we doubt, that
the armies were composed of the people as well as of the nobility. The fighting men
amongst the Helvetii were the fourth part of the inhabitants; a clear proof that all the
males of military age bore arms. See Cæsarde bello Gall. lib. i.
We may remark, that the numbers in Cæsar’s commentaries can be more depended on
than those of any other ancient author, because of the Greek translation, which still
remains, and which checks the Latin original.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 416 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[259. ]De Bello Gallico, lib. i. [See secs. 2 and 29.]
[260. ]Titi Livii, lib. xxxiv. cap. 17.
[261. ]In vita Marii. [Plutarch, Lives, in the life of Caius Marius, sec. 6.]
[262. ]De Bello Hisp. [The Spanish War, sec. 8. This work is often attributed to Julius
Caesar and is included in the Loeb edition of his writings, but it is doubtful that
Caesar is the author. It was possibly written by Hirtius, who was one of Caesar’s
generals.]
[263. ]Vell. Paterc. lib. ii. § 90. [Velleius Paterculus, Roman History 2.90.]
[264. ]Lib. iii.
[265. ]Lib. xliv. [Marcus Junianus Justinus, Philippic History, chap. 44.]
[266. ]“Nec numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Pœnos, nec artibus
Græcos, nec denique hoc ipso hujus gentis, ac terræ domestico nativoque sensu, Italos
ipsos ac Latinos—superavimus.” De harusp. resp. cap. 9. [Cicero, De Haruspicum
Responsis (The Speech concerning the Response of the Soothsayers) 9.19: “We have
excelled neither Spain in population, nor Gaul in vigour, nor Carthage in versatility,
nor Greece in art, nor indeed Italy and Latium itself in the innate sensibility
characteristic of this land and its peoples” (Loeb translation by N. H. Watts).] The
disorders of Spain seem to have been almost proverbial: “Nec impacatos a tergo
horrebis Iberos.” Virg. Georg. lib. iii. [Virgil, Georgics 3.408: “never . . . need you
fear . . . restless Spaniards in your rear” (Loeb translation by H. Rushton Fairclough).]
The Iberi are here plainly taken, by a poetical figure, for robbers in general.
[267. ]Varrode re rustica, lib. ii. præf. Columella præf. Sueton. August. cap. 42. [This
passage shows Hume’s tendency to discount what later would be called the problem
of overpopulation. Shortages most likely result not from “the superior power of
population,” to use Malthus’s words, but from the neglect of husbandry and
production.]
[268. ]Though the observations of L’Abbé du Bos should be admitted, that Italy is
now warmer than in former times, the consequence may not be necessary, that it is
more populous or better cultivated. If the other countries of Europe were more savage
and woody, the cold winds that blew from them, might affect the climate of Italy.
[269. ][Trajan was emperor from ad 98 to 117. Titus Antoninus Pius ruled as emperor
from 138 to 161, and his son-in-law, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, from 161 to 180.
Edward Gibbon declares: “The two Antonines . . . governed the Roman world fortytwo
years, with the same invariable spirit of wisdom and virtue. . . . Their united
reigns are possibly the only period of history in which the happiness of a great people
was the sole object of government.” See The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
(New York: Modern Library, n.d.), 1:68.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 417 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[270. ]The inhabitants of Marseilles lost not their superiority over the Gauls in
commerce and the mechanic arts, till the Roman dominion turned the latter from arms
to agriculture and civil life. See Strabo, lib. iv. [1.5]. That author, in several places,
repeats the observation concerning the improvement arising from the Roman arts and
civility: And he lived at the time when the change was new, and would be more
sensible. So also Pliny: “Quis enim non, communicato orbe terrarum, majestate
Romani imperii, profecisse vitam putet, commercio rerum ac societate festæ pacis,
omniaque etiam, quæ occulta antea fuerant, in promiscuo usu facta.” Lib. xiv. proœm.
[Natural History 14.1.2: “For who would not admit that now that intercommunication
has been established throughout the world by the majesty of the Roman Empire, life
has been advanced by the interchange of commodities and by partnership in the
blessings of peace, and that even things that had previously lain concealed have all
now been established in general use?” (Loeb translation by H. Rackham).] “Numine
deûm electa (speaking of Italy) quæ cœlum ipsum clarius faceret, sparsa congregaret
imperia, ritusque molliret, & tot populorum discordes, ferasque linguas sermonis
commercio contraheret ad colloquia, & humanitatem homini daret; breviterque, una
cunctarum gentium in toto orbe patria fieret;” lib. ii. cap. 5. [“. . . chosen by the
providence of the gods to make heaven itself more glorious, to unite scattered
empires, to make manners gentle, to draw together in converse by community of
language the jarring and uncouth tongues of so many nations, to give mankind
civilisation, and in a word to become throughout the world the single fatherland of all
the races” (Loeb translation by H. Rackham). This passage is found at 3.5.39 in the
Loeb edition of Pliny’s Natural History.] Nothing can be stronger to this purpose than
the following passage from Tertullian, who lived about the age of Severus. “Certe
quidem ipse orbis in promptu est, cultior de die & instructior pristino. Omnia jam
pervia, omnia nota, omnia negotiosa. Solitudines famosas retro fundi amœnissimi
obliteraverunt, silvas arva domuerunt, feras pecora fugaverunt; arenæ seruntur, saxa
panguntur, paludes eliquantur, tantæ urbes, quantæ non casæ quondam. Jam nec
insulæ horrent, nec scopuli terrent; ubique domus, ubique populus, ubique respublica,
ubique vita. Summum testimonium frequentiæ humanæ, onerosi sumus mundo, vix
nobis elementa sufficiunt; & necessitates arctiores, et querelæ apud omnes, dum jam
nos natura non sustinet.” De anima, cap. 30. [Tertullian (ad 155?–222?) De Anima
(On the soul) 30.3–4: “A glance at the face of the earth shows us that it is becoming
daily better cultivated and more fully peopled than in olden times. There are few
places now that are not accessible; few, unknown; few, unopened to commerce.
Beautiful farms now cover what once were trackless wastes, the forests have given
way before the plough, cattle have driven off the beasts of the jungle, the sands of the
desert bear fruit and crops, the rocks have been ploughed under, the marshes have
been drained of their water, and, where once there was but a settler’s cabin, great
cities are now to be seen. No longer do lonely islands frighten away the sailor nor
does he fear their rocky coasts. Everywhere we see houses, people, stable
governments, and the orderly conduct of life. The strongest witness is the vast
population of the earth to which we are a burden and she scarcely can provide for our
needs; as our demands grow greater, our complaints against nature’s inadequacy are
heard by all.” Edwin A. Quain, trans. Tertullian: Apologetical Works (Washington:
Catholic University of America Press, 1962). The Fathers of the Church series, vol.
10.] The air of rhetoric and declamation which appears in this passage, diminishes
somewhat from its authority, but does not entirely destroy it.kk The same remark may
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 418 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
be extended to the following passage of Aristides the sophist, who lived in the age of
Adrian. “The whole world,” says he, addressing himself to the Romans, “seems to
keep one holiday; and mankind, laying aside the sword which they formerly wore,
now betake themselves to feasting and to joy. The cities, forgetting their ancient
animosities, preserve only one emulation, which shall embellish itself most by every
art and ornament; Theatres every where arise, amphitheatres, porticoes, aqueducts,
temples, schools, academies; and one may safely pronounce, that the sinking world
has been again raised by your auspicious empire. Nor have cities alone received an
encrease of ornament and beauty; but the whole earth, like a garden or paradise, is
cultivated and adorned: Insomuch, that such of mankind as are placed out of the limits
of your empire (who are but few) seem to merit our sympathy and compassion.”
[Probably in Aristides’ oration To Rome.]
It is remarkable, that though Diodorus Siculus makes the inhabitants of Ægypt, when
conquered by the Romans, amount only to three millions [Library of History 1.31.6.
Almost all ancient manuscripts support Hume’s reading of three million, but the Loeb
edition adopts an alternative reading that makes Diodorus agree with Josephus]; yet
Joseph. de bello Jud. lib. ii. cap. 16. [2.385 in the Loeb edition] says, that its
inhabitants, excluding those of Alexandria, were seven millions and a half, in the
reign of Nero: And he expressly says, that he drew this account from the books of the
Roman publicans, who levied the poll-tax. Strabo, lib. xvii. [1.12] praises the superior
police of the Romans with regard to the finances of Ægypt, above that of its former
monarchs: And no part of administration is more essential to the happiness of a
people. Yet we read in Athenæus, (lib. i. cap. 25. [The Banquet of the Learned 1.33d
in the Loeb edition]) who flourished during the reign of the Antonines, that the town
Mareia, near Alexandria, which was formerly a large city, had dwindled into a village.
This is not, properly speaking, a contradiction. Suidas (August.) says, that the
Emperor Augustus, having numbered the whole Roman empire, found it contained
only 4,101,017 men (?νδρες). There is here surely some great mistake, either in the
author or transcriber. But this authority, feeble as it is, may be sufficient to
counterbalance the exaggerated accounts of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus with
regard to more early times.
[271. ]L’Esprit de Loix, liv. xxiii. chap. 19. [Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws, bk.
23, “Of Laws in the Relation they bear to the Number of Inhabitants,” chap. 19, “Of
the Depopulation of the Globe.”]
[272. ]De Orac. Defectus. [The Obsolescence of Oracles, sec. 8. It should be noted
that the explanation for the silence of the oracles that Hume summarizes is given not
by Plutarch in his own name, but by one of the participants in this dialogue, and that
alternative explanations are advanced by other participants. Hume addresses this point
in note 278, below.]
[273. ]Lib. ii. cap. 62. It may perhaps be imagined, that Polybius, being dependent on
Rome, would naturally extol the Roman dominion. But, in the first place, Polybius,
though one sees sometimes instances of his caution, discovers no symptoms of
flattery. Secondly, This opinion is only delivered in a single stroke, by the by, while
he is intent upon another subject; and it is allowed, if there be any suspicion of an
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 419 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
author’s insincerity, that these oblique propositions discover his real opinion better
than his more formal and direct assertions.
[274. ]Annal. lib. i. cap. 2.
[275. ]Lib. viii. and ix.
[276. ]Plutarch. De his qui sero a Numine puniuntur. [On the Delays of the Divine
Vengeance, sec. 32.]
[277. ]De mercede conductis. [On Salaried Posts in Great Houses.]
[278. ]I must confess that that discourse of Plutarch, concerning the silence of the
oracles, is in general of so odd a texture, and so unlike his other productions, that one
is at a loss what judgment to form of it. It is written in dialogue, which is a method of
composition that Plutarch commonly but little affects. The personages he introduces
advance very wild, absurd, and contradictory opinions, more like the visionary
systems or ravings of Plato than the plain sense of Plutarch. There runs also through
the whole an air of superstition and credulity, which resembles very little the spirit
that appears in other philosophical compositions of that author. For it is remarkable,
that, though Plutarch be an historian as superstitious as Herodotus or Livy, yet there is
scarcely, in all antiquity, a philosopher less superstitious, excepting Cicero and
Lucian. I must therefore confess, that a passage of Plutarch, cited from this discourse,
has much less authority with me, than if it had been found in most of his other
compositions.
There is only one other discourse of Plutarch liable to like objections, to wit, that
concerning those whose punishment is delayed by the Deity. It is also writ in dialogue,
contains like superstitious, wild visions, and seems to have been chiefly composed in
rivalship to Plato, particularly his last book de republica. [Hume has in mind the myth
of Er at the conclusion of book 10 of Plato’s Republic.]
And here I cannot but observe, that Mons. Fontenelle, a writer eminent for candor,
seems to have departed a little from his usual character, when he endeavours to throw
a ridicule upon Plutarch on account of passages to be met with in this dialogue
concerning oracles. The absurdities here put into the mouths of the several personages
are not to be ascribed to Plutarch. He makes them refute each other; and, in general,
he seems to intend the ridiculing of those very opinions, which Fontenelle would
ridicule him for maintaining. See Histoire des oracles. [First published in 1686. The
first English translation was titled The History of Oracles and the Cheats of the Pagan
Priests (London, 1688).]
[279. ]Lib. ii. [5.4. The Loeb edition reads 210,000 cavalry.]
[280. ]He was cotemporary with Cæsar and Augustus.
[1. ][Having previously sketched the differences between the Whigs and the Tories
(see “Of the Parties of Great Britain,” in Part I), Hume takes up their speculative,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 420 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
practical, and historical controversies in this essay and the two that follow. Hume
suggests that it is a contradiction in terms to speak of those who have embraced a
party as philosophers (p. 469). Since his own approach is philosophical, he seeks to
avoid taking sides or being a mere partisan. The philosopher’s task, as Hume
understands it, is to serve as a mediator between contending parties and to promote
compromise or accommodation. This is accomplished by a balanced appraisal of party
controversies in which each side is led to see that its views are not completely right
and that the opposing views are not completely wrong. Compromise is possible only
if neither party triumphs over the other. This may help to explain why Hume
sometimes seems to be more critical of the Whigs, the stronger party of his day, than
of the Tories. Hume’s design and guiding principles are made explicit at the
beginning of the third essay of this sequence, “Of the Coalition of Parties.”]
[2. ][Titus Flavius Vespasianus was Roman emperor from ad 79 to 81. Cesare Borgia,
through the influence of his father, Pope Alexander VI, conquered and ruled the
territory known as the Romagna, in northern Italy, in 1501–1503. Borgia’s cruel and
enterprising methods are described and applauded by Machiavelli in The Prince,
chap. 7. Tulagee Angria was the leader, in the mid-eighteenth century, of an old
family of predatory pirates who operated off of India’s Malabar coast, south of
Bombay. After the failure of earlier efforts to suppress him, Angria was driven from
his stronghold of Gheria in 1756 by European and Indian troops under the command
of Charles Watson and Robert Clive. See Clement Downing, A Compendious History
of the Indian Wars; with an Account of the Rise, Progress, Strength and Forces of
Angria the Pyrate (London, 1737); and An Authentick & Faithful History of that
Arch-Pyrate Tulagee Angria (London, 1756).]
[3. ][Hume has in mind Whig theorists generally but especially John Locke, who is
identified later as the most noted “partizan” of the doctrine that all lawful government
is founded on an original contract or consent of the people. Hume’s sketch of this
doctrine draws loosely from Locke’s Second Treatise. Hume seeks to show that what
these “reasoners” say is contradicted by common opinion and practice. In order to
make his argument from general opinion effective, Hume must reject the claim that
moral philosophy has a rational or a priori basis, and this he does at the conclusion of
the essay.]
[4. ][The transfer of the British crown to William and Mary in 1689 was approved by
parliamentary conventions, called by William, in England and Scotland. By “the
majority of seven hundred,” Hume probably means the total vote of these conventions
approving the transfer and fixing the order of succession after the deaths of William
and Mary.]
[5. ]Lib. ii. cap. 38.
[6. ][Henry IV was king of England from 1399 to 1413.]
[7. ]Tacit. Ann. vi. cap. 14.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 421 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[8. ][King of England from 1509 to 1547. Henry’s greatest innovation was his break
with the Pope and his establishment of the king as the only supreme head on earth of
the Church of England, with full power to reform it.]
[9. ][The Lancastrian kings of England were Henry IV, Henry V, and Henry VI. Their
rule extended from 1399 to 1461. The house of Lancaster took the red rose as its
badge or emblem, while its rival for the throne, the house of York, took the white
rose.]
[10. ][This division of moral duties is explained fully by Hume in the Treatise of
Human Nature, book 3, and in the Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals.
Hume consistently places justice, fidelity to promises, and allegiance to government
in a different category from those virtues that we perform and approve by an original
instinct of nature. In the Treatise, he presents the division as one between “natural”
and “artificial” virtues, but he retreats somewhat from this terminology in the Second
Enquiry (see appendix 3). Thus in the present essay, justice, fidelity, and allegiance,
which had been classified as artificial duties in the Treatise, are called “natural
duties.” Hume will argue, against Locke, that it is inappropriate to base allegiance, or
the obligation to obey rulers, on a prior obligation to keep promises, since both
obligations arise from the same foundation. This argument draws heavily on book 3,
part 2 of the Treatise.]
[11. ][This brief discussion of the ground of allegiance, or the duty to obey
government, should be compared with Hume’s much fuller treatment of this topic in
the Treatise, 3.2.8 (“Of the Source of Allegiance”).]
[12. ][See Hume’s Treatise, 3.2.10 (“Of the Objects of Allegiance”), which addresses
at much greater length the question, To whom is submission due and who are we to
regard as our lawful magistrates?]
[13. ][This topic is discussed at length by Hume in the Treatise, 3.2.3 (“Of the Rules,
which determine Property”).]
[14. ][See Paul de Rapin-Thoyras (1661–1725), Histoire d’ Angleterre. 10 vols. (The
Hague, 1723–27). This was the standard history of England until the publication of
Hume’s. It was written for foreigners, but was quickly translated into English. Rapin,
who was from a Huguenot family, first came to England in 1686 to avoid persecution
and returned two years later with the army of William of Orange. He wrote his history
of England while in retirement in Germany. Initially, at least, Hume judged Rapin’s
work harshly because of its partiality for the Whig side (see Hume’s comments on
Rapin in the variant readings to “Of the Protestant Succession,” note b). The
controversy to which Hume refers involved the succession to the French throne.
When Charles IV of France died in 1328, his wife was expecting a child, who would,
if a son, succeed to the throne. In the meantime, an assembly of barons was called to
appoint as regent the next male heir, who would become Charles’s successor if his
child were a daughter. One claimant was Edward III of England, the nephew and
nearest male relation of Charles IV, who descended from the royal house of France by
his mother, but this claim was rejected by the barons. Philip of Valois, the late king’s
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 422 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
cousin, was elected regent and, after a daughter was born to the queen widow, was
placed on the throne as Philip VI. Hume discusses this dispute and its consequences in
his account of Edward’s reign in the History of England.]
[15. ][Germanicus (15 bc–ad 19) was adopted by his uncle, Tiberius, in ad 4. Drusus
(13? bc–ad 23) was the son of Tiberius.]
[16. ]Herodian, lib. ii. [Commodus was emperor from ad 180 to 192. The rule of
Pertinax lasted for only three months (January 1 to March 28) in the year 193. The
struggle between Lucius Septimius Severus and his rivals (Didius Julianus,
Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus) took place from 193 to 197.]
[17. ][Julius Capitolinus, Maximus and Balbinus, sec. 14, in Scriptores Historiae
Augustae: “In the meantime Gordian Caesar was lifted up by the soldiers and hailed
emperor (that is, Augustus), there being no one else at hand” (Loeb translation by
David Magie). The young Gordian was saluted as emperor by the praetorians in ad
238, following the murder that year of his uncle and the suicide of his grandfather
(both emperors named Gordian) and the murders of Balbinus and Pupienus Maximus,
who had succeeded the Gordians as joint emperors.]
[18. ]It is remarkable, that, in the remonstrance of the duke of Bourbon and the
legitimate princes, against this destination of Louis the XIVth, the doctrine of the
original contract is insisted on, even in that absolute government. The French nation,
say they, chusing Hugh Capet and his posterity to rule over them and their posterity,
where the former line fails, there is a tacit right reserved to choose a new royal family;
and this right is invaded by calling the bastard princes to the throne, without the
consent of the nation. But the Comte de Boulainvilliers, who wrote in defence of the
bastard princes, ridicules this notion of an original contract, especially when applied
to Hugh Capet; who mounted the throne, says he, by the same arts, which have ever
been employed by all conquerors and usurpers. He got his title, indeed, recognized by
the states after he had put himself in possession: But is this a choice or contract? The
Comte de Boulainvilliers, we may observe, was a noted republican; but being a man
of learning, and very conversant in history, he knew that the people were never almost
consulted in these revolutions and new establishments, and that time alone bestowed
right and authority on what was commonly at first founded on force and violence. See
Etat de la France, Vol. III. [Henri de Boulainvilliers (1658–1722), Etat de la France
(State of France). 3 vols. (Londres, 1727).]
[19. ]See Locke on Government, chap. vii. § 90. [In this citation and the next, Hume
is paraphrasing Locke rather than quoting him exactly.]
[20. ]Id. chap. xi. § 138, 139, 140.
[21. ][See Crito 50c and following. Socrates here imagines what “the laws and the
commonwealth” would say of Crito’s proposal that he escape from prison. Agreement
or promise is one of the principles of obligation that “the laws” appeal to in the speech
that Socrates invents for them, but Socrates does not say in his own name that a
promise to obey the laws obligates him to remain in prison.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 423 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[22. ][Both terms mean to make innovations, especially political changes.]
[1. ][Passive obedience is the doctrine that it is not lawful, under any pretense
whatsoever, to take arms against the king or those who act under the king’s authority.
This doctrine was held, in the seventeenth century, by the court party, and in the
eighteenth by a segment of the Tory party. Hume grants that this doctrine should not
be followed when doing so would threaten the public safety, but he defends it as a
better practical rule, under most circumstances, than the Whig doctrine of resistance.
This essay should be compared with Hume’s discussion of the same topic in the
Treatise, 3.2.9 (“Of the Measures of Allegiance”). In the Treatise, the doctrine of
passive obedience is called an “absurdity”; but in this later and more popular
treatment of the matter, which was written during or shortly after the Jacobite rising
of 1745, Hume takes pains to say nothing that would discredit the salutary principle of
obedience to law.]
[2. ][Locke uses this motto as the epigraph to his Two Treatises of Government.
Compare also the beginning of chapter 30 of Hobbes’s Leviathan: “The office of the
sovereign, be it a monarch or an assembly, consisteth in the end, for which he was
trusted with the sovereign power, namely the procuration of the safety of the people. .
. . But by safety here, is not meant a bare preservation, but also all other contentments
of life, which every man by lawful industry, without danger, or hurt to the
commonwealth, shall acquire to himself.”]
[3. ][This sentence and the one preceding resemble closely what Hobbes says in the
Leviathan about the cause of oppressive rule (see chapter 18, end) and about the
ancient Greeks and Romans as the source of the doctrine of tyrannicide (see chapter
29).]
[1. ][The parliamentary debate that Hume is recreating took place in the early 1640s,
some 160 years after the accession of Henry VII, the first Tudor monarch, in 1485.
Hadrian was emperor from ad 117 to 138, some 160 years after Octavian received the
title Augustus (28 bc) and brought the Roman republic to an end. The argument is that
it is as absurd to oppose the Crown’s prerogatives by appealing to pre-Tudor
precedent as it would be to use constitutional practices in republican Rome as a
precedent in Hadrian’s time.]
[2. ][English kings from the house of Anjou are known as the Angevins or
Plantagenets. Their rule began with the accession of Henry II in 1154 and ended with
the abdication of Richard II in 1399. The rule of the house of Tudor began with Henry
VII’s accession in 1485 and ended with the death of Elizabeth I in 1603. Stuart rule in
England began with the accession of James I in 1603 and ended with the death of
Anne in 1714.]
[3. ][The Magna Carta was agreed to by King John in 1215 at the insistence of the
Norman barons. In reviewing its many provisions, Hume observes that the Magna
Carta “either granted or secured very important liberties and privileges to every order
of men in the kingdom; to the clergy, to the barons, and to the people.” History of
England, chap. 11 (vol. 1, pp. 442–43 in the Liberty Fund edition).]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 424 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[4. ][See William Camden (1551–1623), Annales rerum Anglicarum et Hibernicarum,
regnante Elizabetha (pt. I, 1615; pt. II, 1625); the first English version of the whole
work by a single translator (R. Norton) appeared in 1635 as The Historie of the most
renowned and victorious princesse Elizabeth, late Queen of England.]
[5. ][This concludes Hume’s recreation of constitutional arguments that the popular
party and the Royalists might have made at the outbreak of the Civil War. It should be
noted that by the time this essay appeared in late 1759 or early 1760, Hume had
completed the volumes of the History of England that deal with the Tudor and Stuart
periods. In this essay as in the History, he calls into question the prevailing Whig
interpretation of the constitution.]
[1. ][Hume had prepared this essay, along with “Of the Original Contract” and “Of
Passive Obedience,” for the 1748 edition of his Essays, Moral and Political, but his
friend Charles Erskine, acting under Hume’s authority, had suppressed it. Hume
explained in a letter to Erskine that his essay examines the question of the advantages
and disadvantages of each line of succession “as coolly & impartially as if I were
remov’d a thousand Years from the present Period: But this is what some People think
extremely dangerous, & sufficient, not only to ruin me for ever, but also throw some
Reflection on all my Friends, particularly those with whom I am connected at present.
I have wrote to Millar to send you the Sheets and I hereby make you entire Master to
dispose of this last Essay as you think proper” (Greig, Letters of David Hume,
1:112–13).
The question of the succession was particularly sensitive at this time because of the
Jacobite rising of 1745 on behalf of the Young Pretender, Prince Charles Edward
Stuart, in the aftermath of which many Scottish Jacobites were executed or
imprisoned. Hume’s essay reopens the question and gives Jacobite arguments in favor
of the Stuart succession an impartial hearing, alongside Whig arguments in favor of
the Hanoverian succession. His intention is to weigh the alternatives with the
“temper” as well as the “understanding” of a philosopher. Hume concludes by making
a strong case for acceptance of the present establishment in the house of Hanover. He
perhaps calculates that the best way to reconcile the Jacobites and their sympathizers
to the established succession is to begin by giving their side its due.]
[1. ][Christiaan Huygens (1629–95), Dutch mathematician, astronomer, physicist, and
inventor, was one of his century’s leading men of science. Through Colbert’s
influence and with the promise of a generous stipend, he was invited by Louis XIV in
1665 to take up residence in France, where he lived until 1681. Huygens and other
scientists were enlisted to work on problems connected with navigation and
shipbuilding as part of Colbert’s ambitious plan to improve the French navy.]
[2. ][Sir Francis Drake (1545–95) made his voyage around the world from 1577 to
1580. Queen Elizabeth I, who had furnished Drake with means for the voyage,
conferred the honor of knighthood on him in 1581.]
[3. ][Sir Thomas More (1478–1535), for a time Lord Chancellor under Henry VIII,
later incurred the king’s hostility for refusing to swear any oath that would recognize
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 425 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Henry’s right to divorce Queen Catherine or his supremacy over the church in
England. More was convicted of high treason on perjured testimony and beheaded. In
More’s Utopia, which was first published in Latin in 1516, a fictional mariner named
Raphael Hythlodaeus recounts the details of a voyage to the island of Utopia (literally,
“no place”). The government of Utopia resembles that sketched in Plato’s Republic in
providing for a community of goods and the rule of the wise.]
[4. ][In the discussion that follows, Hume presupposes a familiarity with some of the
distinctive institutions of Harrington’s Commonwealth of Oceana. Harrington’s model
is an “equal commonwealth,” that is, one that avoids those extremes of inequality that
give rise to party strife between the rich and the poor. Equality is preserved in the
“foundation” of the commonwealth by its Agrarian Law and in the “superstructures”
by its system of rotation. The Agrarian Law prevents the concentration of landed
property in a few hands by requiring that the owner of a large estate leave his lands
divided more or less equally among his male heirs, if there is more than one son. The
system of rotation applies to the government of the commonwealth, which has three
orders: the senate, consisting of men who are elected for their excellent qualities (a
“natural aristocracy”), which debates and proposes legislation; the people, as
represented by a popular assembly, who enact legislation; and the magistrates, who
are elected for terms of one or three years and whose function is to execute the laws.
The senate and the popular assembly are each upon a triennial rotation or annual
change in the one-third part. The magistrates, after serving their terms, must enjoy an
interval or vacation equal to the length of the time in office.]
[5. ][The Lords of the Articles was an ancient institution in the Scottish parliament,
consisting of a committee chosen from the three estates. The king was able to shape
the composition of the group through his influence over the bishops, who had a
decisive voice in choosing the other members. As Hume points out in the History of
England, chapter 55, no motion could be made in parliament without the previous
consent of the Lords of the Articles. This gave the king, in addition to his negative
after bills had passed through parliament, another, indirectly, before their
introduction. This latter negative, in Hume’s view, was a prerogative of much greater
consequence than the former; and “the nation, properly speaking, could not be said to
enjoy any regular freedom” until the Lords of the Articles was abolished, first in 1641
and finally in 1690.]
[6. ][Niccolò Machiavelli, Discorsi sopra la Prima Deca di Tito Livio (Discourses on
the first ten books of Titus Livy), bk. 3, chap. 1. The Discourses, which was probably
written between 1513 and 1518, was published posthumously in 1531. The first
English translation was published in 1636.]
[7. ][The usual method by which the Great Council of Venice elected magistrates was
as follows: “Three urns were placed in front of the ducal throne, those on the right and
left containing half as many balls each as there were members present, all the balls
being white with the exception of thirty in each urn which were of gold. In the middle
urn were sixty balls, thirty-six gold and twenty-four white. The office to be filled
having been announced to the Great Council, the members drew from the urns on the
right and left. Those who drew white resumed their seats, the sixty who drew gold
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 426 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
drew again from the middle urn. Of the sixty, the twenty-four who drew white
resumed their seats, the thirty-six who drew gold became electors. They then divided
themselves by lot into four groups of nine each. The groups retired separately, and
each nominated a candidate for the vacant office, six votes being required for
nomination. The four candidates thus nominated were then presented to the Great
Council and voted for by that body, a plurality electing. No two members of any
family were permitted to serve as electors for the same vacancy. If all four groups of
electors agreed on the same candidate, he was declared elected without the formality
of a ballot.” See George B. McClellan, The Oligarchy of Venice (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Co., 1904), pp. 159–60. John Adams, who describes the Venetian ballot in his
Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America, vol. 1,
chap. 2, calls it “a complicated mixture of choice and chance.” Harrington adopted the
Venetian Ballot in his Commonwealth of Oceana.]
[8. ][From the late thirteenth century onward, the cantons that made up the Swiss
Confederation were pledged to use their militias for mutual defense, and this citizen
army was notably successful in maintaining the country’s independence against
foreign enemies. These militias were formed on the principle that all able-bodied
males are liable to military service and should receive arms and regular training. For
an elaboration of the argument that a militia on the Swiss model is the appropriate
military system for a republic, see Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Considerations on the
Government of Poland, chap. 12.]
[9. ][See Jean-François-Paul de Gondi, Cardinal de Retz (1614–79), Mémoires, in
Œuvres, nouvelle éd. (Paris: Hachette, 1870–96), 2:422. While assistant to his uncle,
the archbishop of Paris, Gondi was one of the leaders of the Fronde (1648–53), a
rebellion against the government of Anne of Austria, regent for her son, Louis XIV,
and her minister, Cardinal Mazarin. Gondi became cardinal in 1652 and afterward
styled himself Cardinal de Retz. His Mémoires were first published in 1717. An
English translation appeared in 1723.]
[10. ][The editor could not establish the identity of the poet cited here by Hume. The
point of the poet’s exclamation seems to be that while man forever strives for
perfection or permanence, his works are ever perishable. This may be another instance
in which Hume paraphrases his source loosely rather than quoting it exactly. If so,
possible sources might be Horace, Satires 2.8.62, or Lucretius, The Nature of Things
2.76 or 5.1430–31. Hume includes both Horace and Lucretius in his list of the great
poets (see “Of the Middle Station of Life,” p. 550, under “Essays Withdrawn and
Unpublished”).]
[1. ][This essay appeared only in Essays, Moral and Political, vol. 2 (Edinburgh: A.
Kincaid, 1742).]
[2. ][The source of this couplet could not be located by the editor. It may belong to the
same author, or poem, as the couplet that Hume quotes in “The Epicurean” (see
above, p. 140).]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 427 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[3. ][The major tragedies of Thomas Otway (1652–85) are Don Carlos, The Orphan,
and Venice Preserved. John Dryden (1631–1700), the greatest English poet of his age
and an ardent defender of the Tory cause, was noted for his dramas, poetry, criticism,
and translations of the ancients. Hume may have in mind Dryden’s heroic plays,
which often have an extravagant and bombastic character.]
[1. ][This essay appeared only in Essays, Moral and Political, vol. 2.]
[2. ][See Plutarch’s Lives, in the life of Brutus, sec. 12. According to Plutarch’s
account, Brutus kept the conspiracy against Caesar secret from his friend Statillius the
Epicurean, because earlier, when put to the test indirectly in a discussion, Statilius had
replied in the way that Hume describes.]
[3. ][The editor could not identify this ancient philosopher or the source of Hume’s
story.]
[4. ][See Epictetus, Encheiridion (Manual), sec. 16: “When you see someone weeping
in sorrow, either because a child has gone on a journey, or because he has lost his
property, beware that you be not carried away by the impression that the man is in the
midst of external ills, but straightway keep before you this thought: ‘It is not what has
happened that distresses this man (for it does not distress another), but his judgement
about it.’ Do not, however, hesitate to sympathize with him so far as words go, and, if
occasion offers, even to groan with him; but be careful not to groan also in the centre
of your being” (Loeb translation by W. A. Oldfather).]
[5. ][Diogenes of Sinope (400?–325? bc) was founder of the Cynic school of
philosophy, which sought happiness in an austere life, devoted to the satisfaction of
only one’s few natural needs and to the open disdain for things conventionally
thought to be desirable. Hume here follows the account of Diogenes’ savings in
Cicero, Tusculan Disputations 1.43 (104).]
[6. ][The editor could not locate a Eugenius, either real or fictional, whose life
conforms to these details. This story, like the letter that follows, is probably Hume’s
fabrication. Thus Eugenius (literally, “nobly born,” “good spirit,” “good inclination,”
or “good character”) may personify the philosophic life in which the sentiments of the
heart are properly accommodated. Joseph Addison uses Eugenius as a name for one of
the participants in his “Dialogues upon the Usefulness of Ancient Medals” (1721);
and Laurence Sterne would later give the name to a character in his novel Tristram
Shandy (1760–67).]
[1. ][This essay appeared only in Essays, Moral and Political, vol. 2.]
[2. ][Hume is quoting Proverbs 30:7–9 as these verses appear in the King James
Version of the Bible. Other sources of his time also refer to these verses as “Agur’s
prayer.” Proverbs 30:1 begins: “The words of Agur the son of Jakeh.”]
[3. ][William I, who ruled from 1066 to 1087.]
[4. ][Henry II, who ruled from 1154 to 1189.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 428 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[5. ][Ruled from 1272 to 1307.]
[6. ][Henry V, who ruled from 1413 to 1422.]
[7. ][Ruled from 1558 to 1603.]
[8. ][Ruled from 1422 to 1461.]
[9. ][Ruled from 1559 to 1560.]
[10. ][Ruled from 1461 to 1483.]
[11. ][Ruled from 1515 to 1547.]
[12. ][Gustav Eriksson Vasa, who ruled from 1523 to 1560.]
[13. ][Ruled from 1611 to 1632.]
[14. ][Peter the Great, who ruled from 1689 to 1725.]
[15. ][Edmund Spenser (1552?–99), best known for The Faerie Queene.]
[16. ][Probably the dramatist Ben Jonson (1572–1637).]
[17. ][Kouli-Kan was a European name for Nadir Shah, emperor of Persia from 1736
to 1747. Nadir, a robber chief, became general of the royal army in 1727 and drove
the occupying Afghan army out of Persia. He usurped the throne in 1736 and
established a new dynasty. Later in the decade he invaded and conquered India.]
[18. ][John Churchill (1650–1722), First Duke of Marlborough, was commander-inchief
of the British and Dutch forces during the War of the Spanish Succession.]
[19. ][Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux (1636–1711), poet and literary critic.]
[1. ][This essay appeared in the first edition of Essays, Moral and Political
(Edinburgh: A. Kincaid, 1741) and in subsequent editions up to and including Essays
and Treatises on Several Subjects (London: A. Millar; and Edinburgh: A. Kincaid and
A. Donaldson, 1760, 4 vols.), after which it was withdrawn.]
[1. ][This essay appeared in the first edition of Essays, Moral and Political, 1741, and
in subsequent editions up to and including Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects,
1760, after which it was withdrawn.]
[2. ][Hume’s tale about the Scythian women could not be located by the editor in any
source, ancient or modern. For an account of the legends associated with the
Scythians, and their literary influence, see James William Johnson, “The Scythian:
His Rise and Fall,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 20 (January 1959), pp. 250–57.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 429 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[3. ][See Plato, Symposium 189c–193d. The story that Hume relates is told in the
dialogue by the comic poet Aristophanes, who delivers one of seven speeches
(including the speech of Alcibiades) on love. Hume changes some crucial details. The
androgynes (male-female) were but one of three original sexes. There were, in
addition, the composite males and the composite females. As Hume relates,
heterosexual love grows out of Zeus’s splitting of the androgynes into males and
females, who both long for a reunion with their former partners. Hume is silent,
however, about homosexual love, which results from the splitting of the other
composite persons into female-female and male-male. Whereas Hume writes in
support of heterosexual love and marriage, Aristophanes depreciates it and praises
instead male homosexuality.]
[1. ][This essay appeared in the first edition of Essays, Moral and Political, 1741, and
in subsequent editions up to and including Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects,
1760, after which it was withdrawn.]
[2. ][Cato’s stepsister Servilia was for a time Julius Caesar’s mistress. This led to the
rumor that Caesar was the real father of Brutus. Valeria Messalina, at the age of
fourteen, married her second cousin Claudius, then forty-eight, shortly before his
accession as emperor. She was notorious for her sexual profligacy and even went so
far as to celebrate a marriage with Gaius Silius while the emperor was away from
Rome. Messalina and Silius were put to death in ad 48 at the behest of Narcissus,
Claudius’s private secretary.
Julia, the only daughter of Emperor Augustus, was married to Tiberius in 11 bc At
last in 2 bc, her father, learning of her adulterous conduct, sent her into exile, where
she died in ad 14. Hume might be referring instead, however, to Julia, Caligula’s
sister, who was banished in 39 ad for adultery with her brother-in-law. After she was
restored by Claudius, Messalina accused her of adultery with Seneca. She was
banished once more and soon after put to death.]
[3. ][Horace, Epistles 1.10.24–25: “Naturam expelles furca, tamen usque recurret, et
mala perrumpet furtim fastidia victrix”: “You may drive out Nature with a pitchfork,
yet she will ever hurry back, and, ere you know it, will burst through your foolish
contempt in triumph” (Loeb translation by H. Rushton Fairclough).]
[4. ][Lucretius, The Nature of Things 3.57–58: “. . . only then are the words of truth
drawn up from the very heart . . .” (Loeb translation by Martin Ferguson Smith). The
context of these words is the poet’s observation that we can best discern what kind of
person someone is in a time of adversity, when he is in danger or peril.]
[1. ][This essay appeared in the first edition of Essays, Moral and Political, 1741, and
in subsequent editions up to and including Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects
(London: Printed for A. Millar; A. Kincaid, J. Bell, and A. Donaldson, in Edinburgh.
And sold by T. Cadell in the Strand. 1768, 2 vols.), after which it was withdrawn.]
[2. ][Shakespeare, The First Part of King Henry the Fourth, act 2, sc. 9.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 430 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[3. ][Antoine Houdar de la Motte (1672–1731), “L’Avare et Minos” (The miser and
Minos), in Œuvres (Paris, 1754) 9:97–100; (Geneva: Slatkine Reprints, 1970),
2:441–42.]
[4. ][Alexander Pope, Epistles to Several Persons, Epistle III. To Allen Lord Bathurst.
“Of the Use of Riches” (lines 109–10).]
[1. ][This essay first appeared in January 1742, in Essays, Moral and Political, vol. 2.
By that time, Walpole’s position as the king’s first minister was perilous, for his party
had won only a small majority in the general election of 1741, and the ministry was
under heavy attack for its conduct of foreign affairs. His resignation was forced in
early February 1742, after which he retired to the House of Lords as Earl of Orford. In
the Advertisement to this volume of Essays, Moral and Political, Hume writes: “The
Character of Sir Robert Walpole was drawn some Months ago, when that Great Man
was in the Zenith of his Power. I must confess, that, at present, when he seems to be
upon the Decline, I am inclin’d to think more favourably of him, and to suspect, that
the Antipathy, which every true born Briton naturally bears to Ministers of State,
inspir’d me with some Prejudice against him. The impartial Reader, if any such there
be; or Posterity, if such a Trifle can reach them, will best be able to correct my
Mistakes in this Particular.” In the editions of Hume’s Essays appearing from 1748 to
1768, the essay on Walpole, who had died in 1745, was printed in a footnote at the
end of “That Politics may be reduced to a Science.” It was dropped in 1770. Hume
began the footnote as follows: “What our author’s opinion was of the famous minister
here pointed at, may be learned from that essay, printed in the former editions, under
the title of A character of Sir Robert Walpole: It was as follows.” At the end of the
footnote, Hume added: “The author is pleased to find, that after animosities are
subsided, and calumny has ceased, the whole nation almost have returned to the same
moderate sentiments with regard to this great man, if they are not rather become more
favourable to him, by a very natural transition, from one extreme to another. The
author would not oppose those humane sentiments towards the dead; though he
cannot forbear observing, that the not paying more of our public debts was, as hinted
in this character, a great, and the only great, error in that long administration.”]
[2. ]Moderate in the exercise of power, not equitable in engrossing it.
[3. ][Walpole’s mansion in Norfolk.]
[1. ][The essays “Of Suicide” and “Of the Immortality of the Soul” were sent by
Hume to his publisher, Andrew Millar, probably in late 1755 for inclusion in a
volume entitled Five Dissertations. Also to be included in the volume were “The
Natural History of Religion,” “Of the Passions,” and “Of Tragedy.” The volume was
printed by Millar, and several copies were distributed in advance of publication. Yet
faced with the prospect of ecclesiastical condemnation and perhaps even official
prosecution, Hume decided, at the urging of friends, that it would be prudent not to go
ahead with publication of the essays on suicide and immortality. Accordingly, they
were excised by Millar, and a new essay, “Of the Standard of Taste,” was added to the
volume, which appeared in 1757 under the title Four Dissertations. Despite Hume’s
precautions, clerical critics such as Dr. William Warburton knew of the suppressed
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 431 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
essays and sometimes alluded to them. The essays even appeared in French
translation in 1770, apparently without Hume ever learning of this fact. Shortly before
his death, Hume added a codicil to his will, expressing the desire that William Strahan
publish his “Dialogues concerning Natural Religion” at any time within two years of
the philosopher’s death, to which Strahan “may add, if he thinks proper, the two
Essays formerly printed but not published” (in J. Y. T. Greig, ed., The Letters of
David Hume, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1932, 2:453). “Of Suicide” and “Of the
Immortality of the Soul” were published in 1777, though probably not by Strahan,
under the title Two Essays. Neither the author’s name nor that of the publisher appears
on the title page. The details surrounding the suppression and subsequent publication
of these two essays are discussed at length by Green and Grose in the prefatory
materials to their edition of Hume’s Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary (New
Edition; London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1889), pp. 60–72, and by Mossner in
The Life of David Hume (Edinburgh: Nelson, 1954), pp. 319–35.
The present text of “Of Suicide” is printed, by permission, from a proof-copy of the
unpublished, 1755 version of the essay that is owned by the National Library of
Scotland. This proof-copy has twenty corrections in Hume’s own hand. The
posthumous, 1777 edition of the essay fails to make these corrections, and it departs
from the earlier printed version in paragraphing, punctuation, capitalization, and, on
occasion, wording. The 1755 version of “Of Suicide” was unavailable to Green and
Grose. They follow instead the 1777 edition, but introduce variations of their own.
Since we cannot determine the extent to which the 1777 edition reflects Hume’s
wishes, the corrected, 1755 version of “Of Suicide” is the copy-text of choice. The
editor is grateful to the Trustees of the National Library of Scotland for providing a
photocopy of the corrected, 1755 versions of “Of Suicide” and “Of the Immortality of
the Soul” and for giving permission to reprint these essays.]
[2. ]De Divin. lib. ii. [Cicero, On Divination 2.72 (150).]
[3. ]Agamus Deo gratias, quod nemo in vita teneri potest. Seneca, Epist. xii. [Seneca,
Epistles, no. 12: “On Old Age,” sec. 10: “And let us thank God that no man can be
kept in life” (Loeb translation by Richard M. Gummere).]
[4. ]Tacit. Ann. lib. i. [See Tacitus, Annals 1.79 for the debate in the Roman senate
over whether or not the tributaries of the Tiber should be altered. Tacitus observes
that whatever the deciding factor—the protests of the colonies, the difficulty of the
work, or a superstitious reluctance to alter the course assigned to rivers by
nature—Piso’s motion “that nothing be changed” was agreed to.]
[5. ][Filippo Strozzi (1489–1538), a leading Florentine banker and for most of his life
a supporter of the Medici in Florence and at the papal court in Rome, was best
remembered by later generations for his opposition to the Medici dukes of Florence,
Alessandro and Cosimo. Filippo became a leader of the Florentine exiles after he and
his sons were driven from Florence in 1533 by Alessandro. Following Alessandro’s
murder in 1537, Filippo led an exile army toward Florence, which was met and
defeated by soldiers loyal to Alessandro’s successor, Cosimo. Filippo was captured
and subjected to torture in a vain effort to force him to implicate others. In December
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 432 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
1538, after seventeen months of imprisonment, he took his own life. Filippo, a
classical scholar of some attainments, modeled his suicide on that of Cato the
Younger. He left behind an epitaph, which read in part: “Liberty, therefore, perceiving
that together with him all her hopes had perished, having surrendered herself and
cursed the light of day, demanded to be sealed up in his same tomb. Thus, O Stranger,
shed copious tears if the Florentine republic means anything at all to you, for Florence
will never see again so noble a citizen . . . whose highest command was: in dying for
one’s fatherland, any sort of death is sweet.” Quoted in Melissa Meriam Bullard,
Filippo Strozzi and the Medici (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980), pp.
176–77.]
[6. ]It would be easy to prove, that Suicide is as lawful under the christian
dispensation as it was to the heathens. There is not a single text of scripture, which
prohibits it. That great and infallible rule of faith and practice, which must controul all
philosophy and human reasoning, has left us, in this particular, to our natural liberty.
Resignation to providence is, indeed, recommended in scripture; but that implies only
submission to ills, which are unavoidable, not to such as may be remedied by
prudence or courage. Thou shalt not kill is evidently meant to exclude only the killing
of others, over whose life we have no authority. That this precept like most of the
scripture precepts, must be modified by reason and common sense, is plain from the
practice of magistrates, who punish criminals capitally, notwithstanding the letter of
this law. But were this commandment ever so express against Suicide, it could now
have no authority. For all the law of Moses is abolished, except so far as it is
established by the law of nature; and we have already endeavoured to prove, that
Suicide is not prohibited by that law. In all cases, Christians and Heathens are
precisely upon the same footing; and if Cato and Brutus, Arria and Portia acted
heroically, those who now imitate their example ought to receive the same praises
from posterity. The power of committing Suicide is regarded by Pliny as an advantage
which men possess even above the deity himself. Deus non sibi potest mortem
consciscere, si velit, quod homini dedit optimum in tantis vitæ pœnis. Lib. ii. Cap. 7.
[Pliny, Natural History 2.5.27 in the Loeb edition: “(God cannot) even if he wishes,
commit suicide, the supreme boon that he has bestowed on man among all the
penalties of life” (Loeb translation by H. Rackham).]
[1. ][For an account of the history of this essay, see “Of Suicide,” fn. 1. The present
text of “Of the Immortality of the Soul” is printed, by permission, from a proof-copy
of the unpublished, 1755 version of the essay that is owned by the National Library of
Scotland. This proof-copy has twenty corrections in Hume’s own hand. The
posthumous, 1777 edition of the essay fails to make these corrections, and it departs
from the earlier printed version in paragraphing, punctuation, capitalization, and, on
occasion, wording. Green and Grose printed their version of “Of the Immortality of
the Soul” from proof-sheets of the 1755 version that were once in the possession of
the Advocates’ Library, Edinburgh, but are now lost. The proof-copy used by Green
and Grose did not have the corrections that appear on the one used for the present
edition. Moreover, Green and Grose depart in important ways from the text printed in
1755 or early 1756.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 433 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[2. ][These observations on the fictitious character of the notion of substance and on
the impossibility of deciding questions of fact or existence by abstract reasoning are
developed by Hume in the Treatise of Human Nature.]
[3. ][Homer speaks of the Elysian Plain and Hesiod of the Isles of the Blessed as
places to which those specially favored by the gods and exempted from death are
transported. Later authors depict Elysium as the abode in Hades of the blessed dead.]
[4. ]Quint. Curtius, lib. vi. cap. 5. [This section of the History of Alexander describes
Alexander’s defeat of the Mardi and the destruction of their fortifications. His anger
was heightened by the capture of Bucephalus.]
[5. ]Sueton. August. cap. 3.
[6. ][The doctrine of metempsychosis, or reincarnation, holds that the soul of a human
being or animal transmigrates at or after death into a new bodily form of the same or
different species. This doctrine is associated especially with the philosopher
Pythagoras and with various Eastern religions.]
[7. ]Lib. vii. cap. 55. [Natural History 7.55 in the Loeb edition: “ . . . how much easier
and safer for each to trust in himself, and for us to derive our idea of future
tranquillity from our experience of it before birth!” (Loeb translation by H. Rackham.)
Futurae is added to the Latin text by Rackham. The context is Pliny’s argument that
neither body nor mind possesses any sensation after death, any more than it did before
birth.]
[a]This Note was added in Ed. M, 1758.
[a]How far delicacy of taste, and that of passion, are connected together in the original
frame of the mind, it is hard to determine. To me there appears a very considerable
connexion between them. For we may observe that women, who have more delicate
passions than men, have also a more delicate taste of the ornaments of life, of dress,
equipage, and the ordinary decencies of behavior. Any excellency in these hits their
taste much sooner than ours; and when you please their taste, you soon engage their
affections.—Editions A to Q; the latter omits the last sentence.
[a]And whether the unlimited exercise of this liberty be advantageous or prejudicial to
the public?—Editions A to P.
[b]I shall endeavor to explain myself.—Editions D to P.
[c]’Tis sufficiently known.—Editions A to P.
[d]Edition Q omits the concluding sentence. Editions A to P have in place of it the
following:—
Since therefore that liberty is so essential to the support of our mixed government; this
sufficiently decides the second question, Whether such a liberty be advantageous or
prejudicial; there being nothing of greater importance in every state than the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 434 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
preservation of the ancient government, especially if it be a free one. But I would fain
go a step farther, and assert, that this liberty is attended with so few inconveniencies,
that it may be claimed as the common right of mankind, and ought to be indulged
them almost in every government: except the ecclesiastical, to which indeed it would
prove fatal. We need not dread from this liberty any such ill consequences as followed
from the harangues of the popular demagogues of Athens and tribunes of Rome. A
man reads a book or pamphlet alone and coolly. There is none present from whom he
can catch the passion by contagion. He is not hurried away by the force and energy of
action. And should he be wrought up to ever so seditious a humour, there is no violent
resolution presented to him, by which he can immediately vent his passion. The
liberty of the press, therefore, however abused, can scarce ever excite popular tumults
or rebellion. And as to those murmurs or secret discontents it may occasion, ’tis better
they should get vent in words, that they may come to the knowledge of the magistrate
before it be too late, in order to his providing a remedy against them. Mankind, it is
true, have always a greater propension to believe what is said to the disadvantage of
their governors, than the contrary; but this inclination is inseparable from them,
whether they have liberty or not. A whisper may fly as quick, and be as pernicious as
a pamphlet. Nay, it will be more pernicious, where men are not accustomed to think
freely, or distinguish between truth and falshood.
It has also been found, as the experience of mankind increases, that the people are no
such dangerous monster as they have been represented, and that it is in every respect
better to guide them, like rational creatures, than to lead or drive them, like brute
beasts. Before the United Provinces set the example, toleration was deemed
incompatible with good government; and it was thought impossible, that a number of
religious sects could live together in harmony and peace, and have all of them an
equal affection to their common country, and to each other. England has set a like
example of civil liberty; and though this liberty seems to occasion some small ferment
at present, it has not as yet produced any pernicious effects; and it is to be hoped, that
men, being every day more accustomed to the free discussion of public affairs, will
improve in the judgment of them, and be with greater difficulty seduced by every idle
rumour and popular clamour.
It is a very comfortable reflection to the lovers of liberty, that this peculiar privilege of
Britain is of a kind that cannot easily be wrested from us, but must last as long as our
government remains, in any degree, free and independent. It is seldom, that liberty of
any kind is lost all at once. Slavery has so frightful an aspect to men accustomed to
freedom, that it must steal upon them by degrees, and must disguise itself in a
thousand shapes, in order to be received. But, if the liberty of the press ever be lost, it
must be lost at once. The general laws against sedition and libelling are at present as
strong as they possibly can be made. Nothing can impose a farther restraint, but either
the clapping an Imprimatur upon the press, or the giving to the court very large
discretionary powers to punish whatever displeases them. But these concessions
would be such a bare-faced violation of liberty, that they will probably be the last
efforts of a despotic government. We may conclude, that the liberty of Britain is gone
for ever when these attempts shall succeed.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 435 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[a]Editions A to P insert the following:—An equal difference of a contrary kind, may
be found on comparing the reigns of Elizabeth and James, at least with regard to
foreign affairs.
They omit the words “foreign as well as domestic” in the next sentence.
[b]Editions A to Q insert: And such, in a great measure, was that of England, till the
middle of the last century, notwithstanding the numerous panegyrics on ancient
English liberty. Editions A and B stop at the word century.
[c]Ed. A reads Vespasian’s, and gives no reference.
[d]This sentence and the notes 1 [8] and 2 [9] were added in Edition K.
[e]This note was added in Edition K.
[f]This paragraph was added in Edition D.
[g]Editions D to N gave the date 1742.
[h]Elogiums: Editions A to D. The word is frequently so written in the Treatise.
[i]Editions D to P give in a note the well-known Character of Sir Robert Walpole.
[See, under “Essays Withdrawn and Unpublished,” Essay VIII, A Character of Sir
Robert Walpole, note 1, for an explanation of the footnote to which Green and Grose
here refer.]
[a]Editions A to P insert as follows:—This passion we may denominate enthusiasm,
or we may give it what appellation we please; but a politician, who should overlook
its influence on human affairs, would prove himself but of a very limited
understanding.
Editions A and B omit the remainder of the paragraph.
[b]Editions A to N add the following paragraph:—I shall conclude this subject with
observing, that the present political controversy, with regard to instructions, is a very
frivolous one, and can never be brought to any decision, as it is managed by both
parties. The country-party pretend not, that a member is absolutely bound to follow
instructions, as an ambassador or general is confined by his orders, and that his vote is
not to be received in the house, but so far as it is conformable to them. The courtparty
again, pretend not, that the sentiments of the people ought to have no weight
with every member; much less that he ought to despise the sentiments of those he
represents, and with whom he is more particularly connected. And if their sentiments
be of weight, why ought they not to express these sentiments? The question, then, is
only concerning the degrees of weight, which ought to be plac’d on instructions. But
such is the nature of language, that it is impossible for it to express distinctly these
different degrees; and if men will carry on a controversy on this head, it may well
happen, that they differ in their language, and yet agree in their sentiments; or differ
in their sentiments, and yet agree in their language. Besides, how is it possible to find
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 436 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
these degrees, considering the variety of affairs which come before the house, and the
variety of places which members represent? Ought the instructions of Totness to have
the same weight as those of London? or instructions, with regard to the Convention,
which respected foreign politics, to have the same weight as those with regard to the
excise, which respected only our domestic affairs?
[a]In Editions A to N this Essay is introduced by the following examination of the
spirit of parties.
I have frequently observed, in comparing the conduct of the court and country parties,
that the former are commonly less assuming and dogmatical in conversation, more apt
to make concessions; and tho’ not, perhaps, more susceptible of conviction, yet more
able to bear contradiction than the latter; who are apt to fly out upon any opposition,
and to regard one as a mercenary designing fellow, if he argues with any coolness and
impartiality, or makes any concessions to their adversaries. This is a fact, which, I
believe, every one may have observed, who has been much in companies where
political questions have been discussed; tho’, were one to ask the reason of this
difference, every party would be apt to assign a different reason. Gentlemen in the
Opposition will ascribe it to the very nature of their party, which, being founded on
public spirit, and a zeal for the constitution, cannot easily endure such doctrines, as
are of pernicious consequence to liberty. The courtiers, on the other hand, will be apt
to put us in mind of the clown mentioned by lord Shaftsbury. “A clown,” says that
excellent author,1 “once took a fancy to hear the Latin disputes of doctors at an
university. He was asked what pleasure he could take in viewing such combatants,
when he could never know so much, as which of the parties had the better. For that
matter, replied the clown, I a’n’t such a fool neither, but I can see who’s the first that
puts t’other into a passion. Nature herself dictated this lesson to the clown, that he
who had the better of the argument would be easy and well-humoured: But he who
was unable to support his cause by reason would naturally lose his temper and grow
violent.”
To which of these reasons shall we adhere? To neither of them, in my opinion; unless
we have a mind to enlist ourselves and become zealots in either party. I believe I can
assign the reason of this different conduct of the two parties, without offending either.
The country party are plainly most popular at present, and perhaps have been so in
most administrations: So that, being accustomed to prevail in company, they cannot
endure to hear their opinions controverted, but are as confident on the public favour,
as if they were supported in all their sentiments by the most infallible demonstration.
The courtiers, on the other hand, are commonly so run down by popular talkers, that if
you speak to them with any moderation, or make them the smallest concessions, they
think themselves extremely beholden to you, and are apt to return the favour by a like
moderation and facility on their part. To be furious and passionate, they know, would
only gain them the character of shameless mercenaries; not that of zealous patriots,
which is the character that such a warm behaviour is apt to acquire to the other party.
In all controversies, we find, without regarding the truth or falshood on either side,
that those who defend the established and popular opinions, are always the most
dogmatical and imperious in their stile: while their adversaries affect almost
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 437 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
extraordinary gentleness and moderation, in order to soften, as much as possible, any
prejudices that may lye against them. Consider the behavior of our free-thinkers of all
denominations, whether they be such as decry all revelation, or only oppose the
exorbitant power of the clergy; Collins, Tindal, Foster, Hoadley. Compare their
moderation and good manners with the furious zeal and scurrility of their adversaries,
and you will be convinced of the truth of my observation. A like difference may be
observed in the conduct of those French writers, who maintained the controversy with
regard to ancient and modern learning. Boileau, Monsieur and Madame Dacier,
l’Abbé de Bos, who defended the party of the ancients, mixed their reasonings with
satire and invective; while Fontenelle, la Motte, Charpentier, and even Perrault, never
transgressed the bounds of moderation and good breeding; though provoked by the
most injurious treatment of their adversaries.
I must, however, observe, that this Remark with regard to the seeming Moderation of
the Court Party, is entirely confin’d to Conversation, and to Gentlemen, who have
been engag’d by Interest or Inclination in that Party. For as to the Court-Writers,
being commonly hir’d Scriblers, they are altogether as scurrilous as the Mercenaries
of the other Party; nor has the Gazeteer any Advantage, in this Respect, above
Common Sense. A man of Education will, in any Party, discover himself to be such,
by his Good-breeding and Decency; as a Scoundrel will always betray the opposite
Qualities. The false Accusers accus’d, &c. is very scurrillous, tho’ that Side of the
Question, being least popular, shou’d be defended with most Moderation. When L—d
B—e, L—d M—t, Mr. L—n take the Pen in Hand, tho’ they write with Warmth, they
presume not upon their Popularity so far as to transgress the Bounds of Decency.
[This paragraph is found only in Editions A and B.]
I am led into this train of reflection, by considering some papers wrote upon that
grand topic of court influence and parliamentary dependence, where, in my humble
opinion, the country party, besides vehemence and satyre, shew too rigid an
inflexibility, and too great a jealousy of making concessions to their adversaries. Their
reasonings lose their force by being carried too far; and the popularity of their
opinions has seduced them to neglect in some measure their justness and solidity. The
following reason will, I hope, serve to justify me in this opinion.
[b]In the present depraved state of mankind. Editions A to D.
[c]The reference to Polybius was added in Edition K.
[a]Editions A and B: to Three Thousand Talents a Year, about 400,000ℓ.
Sterling.—Editions D to Q: only to about sixteen hundred thousand pounds in our
money.
[b]Editions D to Q add: As interest in Rome was higher than with us, this might yield
above 100,000ℓ. a year.
[c]Editions A to N have the note: On ne monte jamais si haut que quand on ne scait
pas ou on va, said Cromwell to the President de Bellievre.—De Retz’s Memoirs.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 438 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[d]Editions A to D read: have entirely lost.
[a]This paragraph was added in Edition B.
[b]The last sentence was added in Edition D.
[c]Editions A to P add the following: Besides, I do not find that the whites in Morocco
ever imposed on the blacks any necessity of altering their complexion, or threatened
them with inquisitions and penal laws in case of obstinacy: nor have the blacks been
more unreasonable in this particular. But is a man’s opinion, where he is able to form
a real opinion, more at his disposal than his complexion? And can one be induced by
force or fear to do more than paint and disguise in the one case as well as in the other?
[d]See Considerations sur le Grandeur et sur la Decadence de Romains. Edition K.
[e]Editions B and D read: “were very ancient.”
[f]Editions B and D read: “they quite” and omit the reference to “the emperor,
Claudius.”
[g]Editions B and D omit the reference to Pliny.
[h]This note is not in A.
[a]Editions A to P add the following note: These words have become of general use,
and therefore I shall employ them, without intending to express by them an universal
blame of the one party, or approbation of the other. The court-party may, no doubt, on
some occasions consult best the interest of the country, and the country-party oppose
it. In like manner, the Roman parties were denominated Optimates and Populares;
and Cicero, like a true party man, defines the Optimates to be such as, in all public
conduct, regulated themselves by the sentiments of the best and worthiest of the
Romans: Pro Sextio, cap. 45. The term of Country-party may afford a favourable
definition or etymology of the same kind: But it would be folly to draw any argument
from that head, and I have regard to it in employing these terms.
[b]Editions A to P add the following: I must be understood to mean this of persons
who have motives for taking party on any side. For, to tell the truth, the greatest part
are commonly men who associate themselves they know not why; from example,
from passion, from idleness. But still it is requisite, that there be some source of
division, either in principle or interest; otherwise such persons would not find parties,
to which they could associate themselves.
[c]Editions B to P add the note: This proposition is true, notwithstanding, that in the
early times of the English government, the clergy were the great and principal
opposers of the crown: But, at that time, their possessions were so immensely great,
that they composed a considerable part of the proprietors of England, and in many
contests were direct rivals of the crown.
[d]This note was added in Edition K.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 439 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[e]This note was added in Edition K.
[f]For this paragraph Editions A to P substitute the following: The clergy had
concurred [in a shameless manner: A to K] with the king’s arbitrary designs,
according to their usual maxims in such cases: And, in return, were allowed to
persecute their adversaries, whom they called heretics and schismatics. The
established clergy were episcopal; the nonconformists presbyterian: So that all things
concurred to throw the former, without reserve, into the king’s party; and the latter
into that of the parliament. The Cavaliers being the court-party, and the Round-heads
the country-party, the union was infallible between the former and the established
prelacy, and between the latter and presbyterian non-conformists. This union is so
natural, according to the general principles of politics, that it requires some very
extraordinary situation of affairs to break it.
[g]Editions A to P add: The question is, perhaps, in itself, somewhat difficult; but has
been rendered more so, by the prejudice and violence of party.
[h]Editions A to P add: sufficient, according to a celebrated author, (Dissertation on
Parties, Letter 2d.) to shock the common sense of aHottentotorSamoiede.
[i]Editions A to K read: almost unbounded compliances. M to Q: great compliances.
[j]Editions A to P add the following note: The author [celebrated writer: A, B, and D]
above cited has asserted, that the real distinction betwixt Whig and Tory was lost at
the revolution, and that ever since they have continued to be mere personal parties,
like the Guelfs and Gibbelines, after the emperors had lost all authority in Italy. Such
an opinion, were it received, would turn our whole history into an ænigma; [and is,
indeed, so contrary to the strongest Evidence, that a Man must have a great Opinion
of his own Eloquence to attempt the proving of it.—A and B.]
I shall first mention, as a proof of a real distinction between these parties, what every
one may have observed or heard concerning the conduct and conversation of all his
friends and acquaintance on both sides. Have not the Tories always borne an avowed
affection to the family of Stuart, and have not their adversaries always opposed with
vigour the succession of that family?
The Tory principles are confessedly the most favourable to monarchy. Yet the Tories
have amost always opposed the court these fifty years; nor were they cordial friends
to King William, even when employed by him. Their quarrel, therefore, cannot be
supposed to have lain with the throne, but with the person who sat on it.
They concurred heartily with the court during the four last years of Queen Anne. But
is any one at a loss to find the reason?
The succession of the crown in the British government is a point of too great
consequence to be absolutely indifferent to persons who concern themselves, in any
degree, about the fortune of the public; much less can it be supposed that the Tory
party, who never valued themselves upon moderation, could maintain a stoical
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 440 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
indifference in a point of such importance. Were they, therefore, zealous for the house
of Hanover? Or was there any thing that kept an opposite zeal from openly appearing,
if it did not openly appear, but prudence, and a sense of decency? [This paragraph is
not in A and B.]
’Tis monstrous to see an established episcopal clergy in declared opposition to the
court, and a non-conformist presbyterian clergy in conjunction with it. What could
have produced such an unnatural conduct in both? Nothing, but that the former
espoused monarchical principles too high for the present settlement, which is founded
on principles of liberty: And the latter, being afraid of the prevalence of those high
principles, adhered to that party from whom they had reason to expect liberty and
toleration.
The different conduct of the two parties, with regard to foreign politics, is also a proof
to the same purpose, Holland has always been most favoured by one, and France by
the other. In short, the proofs of this kind seem so palpable and evident, that ’tis
almost needless to collect them.
[k]So the Essay concludes in Editions Q and R. In place of the last paragraph, the
preceding Editions read as follows:
’Tis however remarkable, that tho’ the principles of Whig and Tory were both of them
of a compound nature; yet the ingredients, which predominated in both, were not
correspondent to each other. A Tory loved monarchy, and bore an affection to the
family of Stuart; but the latter affection was the predominant inclination of the party.
A Whig loved liberty, and was a friend to the settlement in the Protestant line; but the
love of liberty was professedly his predominant inclination. The Tories have
frequently acted as republicans, where either policy or revenge has engaged them to
that conduct; and there was no one of that party, who, upon the supposition, that he
was to be disappointed in his views with regard to the succession, would not have
desired to impose the strictest limitations on the crown, and to bring our form of
government as near republican as possible, in order to depress the family, which,
according to his apprehension, succeeded without any just title. The Whigs, ’tis true,
have also taken steps dangerous to liberty, under colour of securing the succession
and settlement of the crown, according to their views: But as the body of the party had
no passion for that succession, otherwise than as the means of securing liberty, they
have been betrayed into these steps by ignorance, or frailty, or the interests of their
leaders. The succession of the crown was, therefore, the chief point with the Tories;
the security of our liberties with the Whigs. [The remainder of this paragraph is not in
A and B.] Nor is this seeming irregularity at all difficult to be accounted for, by our
present theory. Court and country parties are the true parents of Tory and Whig. But
’tis almost impossible, that the attachment of the court party to monarchy should not
degenerate into an attachment to the monarch; there being so close a connexion
between them, and the latter being so much the more natural object. How easily does
the worship of the divinity degenerate into a worship of the idol? The connexion is
not so great between liberty, the divinity of the old country party or Whigs, and any
monarch or royal family; nor is it so reasonable to suppose, that in that party, the
worship can be so easily transferred from the one to the other. Tho’ even that would
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 441 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
be no great miracle.
’Tis difficult to penetrate into the thoughts and sentiments of any particular man; but
’tis almost impossible to distinguish those of a whole party, where it often happens,
that no two persons agree precisely in the same maxims of conduct. Yet I will venture
to affirm, that it was not so much principle, or an opinion of indefeasible right, which
attached the Tories to the ancient royal family, as affection, or a certain love and
esteem for their persons. The same cause divided England formerly between the
houses of York and Lancaster, and Scotland between the families of Bruce and Baliol;
in an age, when political disputes were but little in fashion, and when political
principles must of course have had but little influence on mankind. The doctrine of
passive obedience is so absurd in itself, and so opposite to our liberties, that it seems
to have been chiefly left to pulpit-declaimers, and to their deluded followers among
the vulgar. Men of better sense were guided by affection; and as to the leaders of this
party, ’tis probable, that interest was their chief motive, and that they acted more
contrary to their private sentiments, than the leaders of the opposite party. [The
remainder of this paragraph is not in A and B.] Tho’ ’tis almost impossible to
maintain with zeal the right of any person or family, without acquiring a good-will to
them, and changing the principle into affection; yet this is less natural to people of an
elevated station and liberal education, who have had full opportunity of observing the
weakness, folly, and arrogance of monarchs, and have found them to be nothing
superior, if not rather inferior to the rest of mankind. The interest, therefore, of being
heads of a party does often, with such people, supply the place both of principle and
affection.
Some, who will not venture to assert, that the real difference between Whig and Tory
was lost at the revolution, seem inclined to think, that the difference is now abolished,
and that affairs are so far returned to their natural state, that there are at present no
other parties amongst us but court and country; that is, men, who by interest or
principle, are attached either to monarchy or to liberty. It must, indeed, be confest,
that the Tory party seem, of late, to have decayed much in their numbers; still more in
their zeal; and I may venture to say, still more in their credit and authority. There are
few men of knowledge or learning, at least, few philosophers, since Mr. Locke has
wrote, who would not be ashamed to be thought of that party; and in almost all
companies the name of Old Whig is mentioned as an uncontestable appellation of
honour and dignity. Accordingly, the enemies of the ministry, as a reproach, call the
courtiers the true Tories; and as an honour, denominate the gentlemen in the
opposition the true Whigs. [The last two sentences were omitted in P. A and B read no
man, omitting “at least . . . wrote.”] The Tories have been so long obliged to talk in
the republican stile, that they seem to have made converts of themselves by their
hypocrisy, and to have embraced the sentiments, as well as language of their
adversaries. There are, however, very considerable remains of that party in England,
with all their old prejudices; and a proof that court and country are not our only
parties, is, that almost all the dissenters side with the court, and the lower clergy, at
least, of the church of England, with the opposition. This may convince us, that some
biass still hangs upon our constitution, some intrinsic weight, which turns it from its
natural course, and causes a confusion in our parties. [This sentence does not occur in
A.]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 442 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
I shall conclude this subject with observing that we never had any Tories in Scotland,
according to the proper signification of the word, and that the division of parties in
this country was really into Whigs and Jacobites. A Jacobite seems to be a Tory, who
has no regard to the constitution, but is either a zealous partizan of absolute
monarchy, or at least willing to sacrifice our liberties to the obtaining the succession
in that family to which he is attached. The reason of the difference between England
and Scotland, I take to be this: Political and religious divisions in the latter country,
have been, since the revolution, regularly correspondent to each other. The
Presbyterians were all Whigs without exception: Those who favoured episcopacy, of
the opposite party. And as the clergy of the latter sect were turned out of the churches
at the revolution, they had no motive for making any compliances with the
government in their oaths, or their forms of prayers, but openly avowed the highest
principles of their party; which is the cause why their followers have been more
violent than their brethren of the Tory party in England.1
As violent Things have not commonly so long a Duration as moderate, we actually
find, that the Jacobite Party is almost entirely vanish’d from among us, and that the
Distinction of Court and Country, which is but creeping in at London, is the only one
that is ever mention’d in this kingdom. Beside the Violence and Openness of the
Jacobite party, another Reason has, perhaps, contributed to produce so sudden and so
visible an Alteration in this part of Britain. There are only two Ranks of Men among
us; Gentlemen, who have some Fortune and Education, and the meanest slaving Poor;
without any considerable Number of that middling Rank of Men, which abounds
more in England, both in Cities and in the Country, than in any other Part of the
World. The slaving Poor are incapable of any Principles: Gentlemen may be
converted to true Principles, by Time and Experience. The middling Rank of Men
have Curiosity and Knowledge enough to form Principles, but not enough to form true
ones, or correct any Prejudices that they may have imbib’d: And ’tis among the
middling Rank, that Tory Principles do at present prevail most in England. [This final
paragraph appears only in A and B.]
[l]This note does not occur in any edition prior to M. The final sentence of the note is
added in Q and R.
[a]In Editions A and B, this and the three next paragraphs were written as follows:
My first Reflection is, that Religions, which partake of Enthusiasm are, on their first
Rise, much more furious and violent than those which partake of Superstition; but in a
little Time become much more gentle and moderate. The Violence of this Species of
Religion, when excited by Novelty, and animated by Opposition, appears from
numberless Instances; of the Anabaptists in Germany, the Camisars in France, the
Levellers and other Fanaticks in England, and the Covenanters in Scotland. As
Enthusiasm is founded on strong Spirits and a presumptuous Boldness of Character, it
naturally begets the most extreme Resolutions; especially after it rises to that Height
as to inspire the deluded Fanaticks with the Opinion of Divine Illuminations, and with
a Contempt of the common Rules of Reason, Morality and Prudence.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 443 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
’Tis thus Enthusiasm produces the most cruel Desolation in human Society: But its
Fury is like that of Thunder and Tempest, which exhaust themselves in a little Time,
and leave the Air more calm and serene than before. The Reason of this will appear
evidently, by comparing Enthusiasm to Superstition, the other Species of false
Religion; and tracing the natural Consequences of each. As Superstition is founded on
Fear, Sorrow, and a Depression of Spirits, it represents the Person to himself in such
despicable Colours, that he appears unworthy, in his own Eyes, of approaching the
Divine Presence, and naturally has Recourse to any other Person, whose Sanctity of
Life, or, perhaps, Impudence and Cunning, have made him be supposed to be more
favoured by the Divinity. To him they entrust their Devotions: To his Care they
recommend their Prayers, Petitions, and Sacrifices: And, by his Means, hope to render
their Addresses acceptable to their incensed Deity. Hence the Origin of Priests1 who
may justly be regarded as one of the grossest Inventions of a timorous and abject
Superstition, which, ever diffident of itself, dares not offer up its own Devotions, but
ignorantly thinks to recommend itself to the Divinity, by the Mediation of his
supposed Friends and Servants. As Superstition is a considerable Ingredient of almost
all Religions, even the most fanatical; there being nothing but Philosophy able to
conquer entirely these unaccountable Terrors; hence it proceeds, that in almost every
Sect of Religion there are Priests to be found: But the stronger Mixture there is of
Superstition, the higher is the Authority of the Priesthood. Modern Judaism and
Popery, especially the latter, being the most barbarous and absurd Superstitions that
have yet been known in the World, are the most enslav’d by their Priests. As the
Church of England may justly be said to retain a strong Mixture of Popish
Superstition, it partakes also, in its original Constitution, of a Propensity to Priestly
Power and Dominion; particularly in the Respect it exacts to the Priest. And though,
according to the Sentiments of that Church, the Prayers of the Priest must be
accompanied with those of the Laity; yet is he the mouth of the Congregation, his
Person is sacred, and without his Presence few would think their public Devotions, or
the Sacraments, and other Rites, acceptable to the Divinity.
On the other Hand, it may be observed, That all Enthusiasts have been free from the
Yoke of Ecclesiastics, and have exprest a great Independence in their Devotion; with
a contempt of Forms, Tradition and Authorities. The Quakers are the most egregious,
tho’, at the same Time, the most innocent, Enthusiasts that have been yet known; and
are, perhaps, the only Sect, that have never admitted Priests among them. The
Independents, of all the English Sectaries, approach nearest to the Quakers in
Fanaticism, and in their Freedom from Priestly Bondage. The Presbyterians follow
after, at an equal Distance in both these Particulars. In short, this Observation is
founded on the most certain Experience; and will also appear to be founded on
Reason, if we consider, that as Enthusiasm arises from a presumptuous Pride and
Confidence, it thinks itself sufficiently qualified to approach the Divinity without any
human Mediator. Its rapturous Devotions are so fervent, that it even imagines itself
actually to approach him by the Way of Contemplation and inward Converse; which
makes it neglect all those outward Ceremonies and Observances, to which the
Assistance of the Priests appears so requisite in the Eyes of their superstitious
Votaries. The Fanatick consecrates himself, and bestows on his own Person a sacred
Character, much superior to what Forms and ceremonious Institutions can confer on
any other.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 444 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
’Tis therefore an infallible Rule, That Superstition is favourable to Priestly Power, and
Euthusiasm as much, or rather more, contrary to it than sound Reason and Philosophy.
The Consequences are evident. When the first Fire of Enthusiasm is spent, Men
naturally, in such fanatical Sects, sink into the greatest Remissness and Coolness in
Sacred Matters; there being no Body of Men amongst them, endow’d with sufficient
Authority, whose Interest is concerned, to support the religious Spirit. Superstition, on
the contrary, steals in gradually and insensibly; renders Men tame and submissive; is
acceptable to the Magistrate, and seems inoffensive to the People: Till at last the
Priest, having firmly establish’d his Authority, becomes the Tyrant and Disturber of
human Society, by his endless Contentions, Persecutions, and religious Wars. How
smoothly did the Romish Church advance in their Acquisition of Power? But into
what dismal Convulsions did they throw all Europe, in order to maintain it? On the
other Hand, our Sectaries, who were formerly such dangerous Bigots, are now
become our greatest Free-thinkers; and the Quakers are, perhaps, the only regular
Body of Deists in the Universe, except the Literati or Disciples of Confucius in China.
[b]The following note is appended in Editions D to N: By Priests, I here mean only
the pretenders to power and dominion, and to a superior sanctity of character, distinct
from virtue and good morals. These are very different from clergymen, who are set
apart by the laws, to the care of sacred matters, and to the conducting our public
devotions with greater decency and order. There is no rank of men more to be
respected than the latter.
[c]As one of the grossest inventions. D to N.
[d]Here D to P add: Modern Judaism and popery, (especially the latter) being the
most unphilosophical and absurd superstitions which have yet been known in the
world, are the most enslaved by their priests. As the church of England may justly be
said to retain some mixture of Popish supersitition, it partakes also, in its original
constitution, of a propensity to priestly power and dominion; particularly in the
respect it exacts to the sacerdotal character. And though, according to the sentiments
of that Church, the prayers of the priest must be accompanied with those of the laity;
yet is he the mouth of the congregation, his person is sacred, and without his presence
few would think their public devotions, or the sacraments, and other rites, acceptable
to the divinity.
[e]This note is not in D and K, which read in the text: and the quakers seem to
approach nearly the only regular body of deists in the universe, the literati, or the
disciples of Confucius in China.
[a]All the Editions from A to P are headed: Of the Dignity of Human Nature.
[b]Editions A to P read: especially when attended with somewhat of the Misanthrope.
[c]Editions A to P add the following: Women are generally much more flattered in
their youth than men; which may proceed from this reason, among others, that their
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 445 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
chief point of honour is considered as much more difficult than ours, and requires to
be supported by all that decent pride, which can be instilled into them.
[d]Editions A to P add: As the latter is commonly the case, I have long since learnt to
neglect such disputes as manifest abuses of leisure, the most valuable present that
could be made to mortals.
[e]This paragraph does not occur in Editions A to D, which read instead of it: I may,
perhaps, treat more fully of this Subject in some future Essay. In the mean Time, I
shall observe, what has been prov’d beyond Question by several great Moralists of the
present Age, that the social Passions are by far the most powerful of any, and that
even all the other Passions receive from them their chief Force and Influence.
Whoever desires to see this Question treated at large, with the greatest Force of
Argument and Eloquence, may consult my Lord Shaftsbury’s Enquiry concerning
Virtue.
[a]Editions A to K have the title: Of Liberty and Despotism.
[b]This note was added in Ed. K.
[c]Editions A to D read: the Advantages and Disadvantages of each.
[d]N.B. This was published in 1742. So Edition P.
[e]Who . . . English; added in Edition K.
[f]Edition A added: and, by the Roman Laws, answerable, upon their own Lives, for
the Life of their Master.
[g]This sentence was added in Edition K.
[h]The cedilla is not found in B, or in some Editions of the Political Discourses,
where the word occurs.
[i]The Athenians, though a Republic, paid Twenty per Cent. for Money, as we learn
from Xenophon.—Edition A: and no note.
The Athenians, though govern’d by a Republic, paid Twenty per Cent. for those sums
of Money, which any emergent Occasion made it necessary for them to borrow; as we
learn from Xenophon.—Edition B: and no note.
The Athenians, though governed by a republic, paid near two hundred per Cent. for
those sums of money, which any emergent occasion made it necessary for them to
borrow; as we learn from Xenophon.—Editions D to Q: and note.
[a]Editions C to P add: that they may almost be esteemed of a different species.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 446 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[b]Editions C to P add: This single circumstance is sufficient to make us apprehend
the wide difference between ancient and modern eloquence, and to let us see how
much the latter is inferior to the former.
[c]This sentence was added in Edition P.
[d]The paragraph was added in Edition K.
[e]As my Lord Bolingbroke.—C and D.
[f]Platos and Virgils.—C and D. Plutarchs and Virgils.—K to P.
[g]C to P proceed: I have confest that there is something accidental in the origin and
progress of the arts in any nation; and yet I cannot forbear thinking, that if the other
learned and polite nations of Europe had possest the same advantages of a popular
government, they would probably have carried eloquence to a greater height than it
has yet reached in Britain. The French sermons, especially those of Flechier and
Bossuet, are much superior to the English in this particular; and in both these authors
are found many strokes of the most sublime poetry. [C and D: and in Flechier there
are found many strokes of the most sublime poetry. His funeral sermon on the
Marechal de Turenne is a good instance.] None but private causes, in that country, are
ever debated before their parliaments or courts of judicature; but notwithstanding this
disadvantage, there appears a spirit of eloquence in many of their lawyers, which,
with proper cultivation and encouragement, might rise to the greatest height. The
pleadings of Patru are very elegant, and give us room to imagine what so fine a genius
could have performed in questions concerning public liberty or slavery, peace or war,
who exerts himself with such success in debates concerning the price of an old horse,
or a gossiping story of a quarrel between an abbess and her nuns. For ’tis remarkable,
that this polite writer, tho’ esteemed by all the men of wit in his time, was never
employed in the most considerable causes of their courts of judicature, but lived and
died in poverty: From an ancient prejudice industriously propagated by the dunces in
all countries, That a man of genius is unfit for business. The disorders produced by the
factions against cardinal Mazarine, made the parliament of Paris enter into the
discussion of public affairs, and during that short interval, there appeared many
symptoms of the revival of ancient eloquence. The avocat generalTalon, in an
oration, invoked on his knees, the spirit of St. Louis to look down with compassion on
his divided and unhappy people, and to inspire them, from above, with the love of
concord and unanimity.1 The members of the French academy have attempted to give
us models of eloquence in their harangues at their admittance: But, having no subject
to discourse upon, they have run altogether into a fulsome strain of panegyric and
flattery, the most barren of all subjects. Their stile, however, is commonly, on these
occasions, very elevated and sublime, and might reach the greatest heights, were it
employed on a subject more favourable and engaging.
There are some circumstances, I confess, in the English temper and genius, which are
disadvantageous to the progress of eloquence, and render all attempts of that kind
more dangerous and difficult among them than among any other nation. The English
are conspicuous for good-sense, which makes them very jealous of any attempts to
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 447 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
deceive them by the flowers of rhetoric and elocution. They are also peculiarly
modest; which makes them consider it as a piece of arrogance to offer any thing but
reason to public assemblies, or attempt to guide them by passion or fancy. I may,
perhaps, be allowed to add, that the people in general are not remarkable for delicacy
of taste, or for sensibility to the charms of the muses. Their musical parts, to use the
expression of a noble author, are but indifferent. Hence their comic poets, to move
them, must have recourse to obscenity; their tragic poets to blood and slaughter: And
hence their orators, being deprived of any such resource, have abandoned altogether
the hopes of moving them, and have confined themselves to plain argument and
reasoning.
These circumstances, joined to particular accidents, may, perhaps, have retarded the
growth of eloquence in this kingdom; but will not be able to prevent its success, if
ever it appear amongst us: And one may safely pronounce, that this is a field, in which
the most flourishing laurels may yet be gathered, if any youth of accomplished genius,
thoroughly acquainted with all the polite arts, and not ignorant of public business,
should appear in parliament, and accustom our ears to an eloquence more
commanding and pathetic. And to confirm me in this opinion, there occur two
considerations, the one derived from ancient, the other from modern times.
[h]The clause “with . . . precision” added in Edition K.
[a]Editions C to P add: I shall therefore proceed to deliver a few observations on this
subject, which I submit to the censure and examination of the learned.
[b]Editions C to P add: According to the necessary progress of things, law must
precede science. In republics law may precede science, and may arise from the very
nature of the government. In monarchies it arises not from the nature of the
government, and cannot precede science. An absolute prince, who is barbarous,
renders all his ministers and magistrates as absolute as himself: And there needs no
more to prevent, for ever, all industry, curiosity, and science.
[c]Editions C to K add the following: Antigonus, being complimented by his
flatterers, as a deity, and as the son of that glorious planet, which illuminates the
universe, Upon that head, says he, you may consult the person that empties my close
stool.
[d]Or . . . resemblance: omitted in C and D.
[e]Editions C to P: There is a very great connection among all the arts, which
contribute to pleasure; and the same delicacy of taste, which enables us to make
improvements in one, will not allow the others to remain altogether rude and
barbarous.
[f]C to P insert: beautiful and cleanly.
[g]Editions C and D read: was an abandon’d and shameless Profligate.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 448 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[h]Editions C to P add the following: And ’tis remarkable, that Cicero, being a great
sceptic in matters of religion, and unwilling to determine any thing on that head
among the different sects of philosophy, introduces his friends disputing concerning
the being and nature of the gods, while he is only a hearer; because, forsooth, it would
have been an impropriety for so great a genius as himself, had he spoke, not to have
said something decisive on the subject, and have carried every thing before him, as he
always does on other occasions. There is also a spirit of dialogue observed in the
eloquent books de Oratore, and a tolerable equality maintained among the speakers:
But then these speakers are the great men of the age preceding the author, and he
recounts the conference as only from hearsay.
[i]This paragraph is not found in Editions C and D.
[j]Editions C to P insert: ’Tis but an indifferent compliment, which Horace pays to his
friend Grosphus, in the ode addressed to him. No one, says he, is happy in every
respect. And I may perhaps enjoy some advantages, which you are deprived of. You
possess great riches: Your bellowing herds cover theSicilianplains. Your chariot is
drawn by the finest horses: And you are arrayed in the richest purple. But the
indulgent fates, with a small inheritance, have givenmea fine genius, and have
endowed me with a contempt for the malignant judgments of the vulgar1Phædrus says
to his patron, Eutychus, If you intend to read my works, I shall be pleased: If not, I
shall, at least, have the advantage of pleasing posterity.2 I am apt to think that a
modern poet would not have been guilty of such an impropriety as that which may be
observed in Virgil’s address to Augustus, when, after a great deal of extravagant
flattery, and after having deified the emperor, according to the custom of those times,
he, at last, places this god on the same level with himself. By your gracious nod, says
he, render my undertaking prosperous; and taking pity, together with me, of the
Swains ignorant of husbandry, bestow your favourable influence on this work.3 Had
men, in that age, been accustomed to observe such niceties, a writer so delicate as
Virgil would certainly have given a different turn to this sentence. The court of
Augustus, however polite, had not yet, it seems, worn off the manners of the republic.
[k]This sentence and the paragraph next following were added in Edition K.
[l]Editions C to P add the following quotation:
Tutti gli altri animai che sono in terra,
O che vivon quieti & stanno in pace;
O se vengon a rissa, & si fan guerra,
A la femina il maschio non la face.
L’orsa con l’orso al bosco sicura erra,
La Leonessa apprésso il Leon giace,
Con Lupo vive il Lupa sicura,
Nè la Giuvenca ha del Torel paura.
Ariosto, Canto 5.
[m]Editions C to P read: In all vegetables ’tis observable, that the flower and the seed
are always connected together; and in like manner, among every species, &c.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 449 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[n]C to O add: I must confess, That my own particular choice rather leads me to
prefer the company of a few select companions, with whom I can, calmly and
peaceably, enjoy the feast of reason, and try the justness of every reflection, whether
gay or serious, that may occur to me. But as such a delightful society is not every day
to be met with, I must think, that mixt companies, without the fair-sex, are the most
insipid entertainment in the world, and destitute of gaiety and politeness, as much as
of sense and reason. Nothing can keep them from excessive dulness but hard drinking;
a remedy worse than the disease.
[o]Editions C to P insert the following: The point of honour, or duelling, is a modern
invention, as well as gallantry; and by some esteemed equally useful for the refining
of manners: But how it has contributed to that effect, I am at a loss to determine.
Conversation, among the greatest rustics, is not commonly invested with such
rudeness as can give occasion to duels, even according to the most refined laws of this
fantastic honour; and as to the other small indecencies, which are the most offensive,
because the most frequent, they can never be cured by the practice of duelling. But
these notions are not only useless: They are also pernicious. By separating the man of
honour from the man of virtue, the greatest profligates have got something to value
themselves upon, and have been able to keep themselves in countenance, tho’ guilty
of the most shameful and most dangerous vices. They are debauchees, spendthrifts,
and never pay a farthing they owe: But they are men of honour; and therefore are to
be received as gentlemen in all companies.
There are some of the parts of modern honour, which are the most essential parts of
morality; such as fidelity, the observing promises, and telling truth. These points of
honour Mr. Addison had in his eye when he made Juba say,
Honour’s a sacred tye, the law of kings,
The noble mind’s distinguishing perfection,
That aids and strengthens virtue when it meets her,
And imitates her actions where she is not:
It ought not to be sported with.
These lines are very beautiful: But I am afraid, that Mr. Addison has here been guilty
of that impropriety of sentiment, with which, on other occasions, he has so justly
reproached our poets. The ancients certainly never had any notion of honour as
distinct from virtue.
[a]Editions C to D: To the Oestrum or Verve. K to P: To the Oestrum or native
enthusiasm.
[b]Edition C: after our tumultuous joys.
[a]The remainder of this sentence does not occur in Editions C and D.
[b]This paragraph does not occur in Editions C and D.
[c]The two following paragraphs do not occur in Editions C and D.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 450 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[d]This sentence does not occur in Editions C and D.
[e]In place of this sentence Editions C and D read as follows: And ’tis observable, in
this Kingdom, that long Peace, by producing Security, has much alter’d them in this
Particular, and has quite remov’d our Officers from the generous Character of their
Profession.
[f]Gaieté de Cœur: Edition C.
[a]Editions C to P add the following: Could the greatest legislator, in such
circumstances, have contrived matters with greater wisdom?
[b]Editions C to P add the following: An honest Turk, who should come from his
seraglio, where every one trembles before him, would be surprized to see Sylvia in
her drawing-room, adored by all the beaus and pretty fellows about town, and he
would certainly take her for some mighty and despotic queen, surrounded by her
guard of obsequious slaves and eunuchs.
[c]C to N add the following paragraph:
I would not willingly insist upon it as an advantage in our European customs, what
was observed by Mehemet Effendi the last Turkish ambassador in France. WeTurks,
says he, are great simpletons in comparison of the Christians. We are at the expense
and trouble of keeping a seraglio, each in his own house: But you ease yourselves of
this burden, and have your seraglio in your friends’ houses. The known virtue of our
British ladies frees them sufficiently from this imputation: And the Turk himself, had
he travelled among us, must have owned, that our free commerce with the fair sex,
more than any other invention, embellishes, enlivens, and polishes society.
[d]This paragraph does not occur in Editions C to K.
[e]Editions C to P add the following: A Spaniard is jealous of the very thoughts of
those who approach his wife; and, if possible, will prevent his being dishonoured,
even by the wantonness of imagination.
[f]Editions C to P add as follows: If a Spanish lady must not be supposed to have legs,
what must be supposed of a Turkish lady? She must not be supposed to have a being
at all. Accordingly, ’tis esteemed a piece of rudeness and indecency at
Constantinople, ever to make mention of a man’s wives before him.1 In Europe, ’tis
true, fine bred people make it also a rule never to talk of their wives. But the reason is
not founded on our jealousy. I suppose it is because we should be apt, were it not for
this rule, to become troublesome to company, by talking too much of them.
The author of the Persian letters has given a different reason for this polite maxim.
Men, says he, never care to mention their wives in company, lest they should talk of
them before people, who are better acquainted with them than themselves.
[g]Editions C to P add as follows: Let us consider then, whether love or friendship
should most predominate in marriage; and we shall soon determine whether liberty or
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 451 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
constraint be most favourable to it. The happiest marriages, to be sure, are found
where love, by long acquaintance, is consolidated into friendship. Whoever dreams of
raptures and extasies beyond the honey-month, is a fool. Even romances themselves,
with all their liberty of fiction, are obliged to drop their lovers the very day of their
marriage, and find it easier to support the passion for a dozen years under coldness,
disdain and difficulties, than a week under possession and security.
[h]In place of “The wife, not secure of her establishment, will still be driving some
separate end or project,” Editions P to C read: “What Dr. Parnel calls, The little
pilf’ring temper of a wife, will be doubly ruinous.”
[i]Editions C and D omit the remainder of the paragraph.
[a]Editions C to K: Naivety, a word which I have borrow’d from the French, and
which is wanted in our language.
[b]The first clause of this sentence was added in Edition K.
[a]Editions D to P add: Instances of this nature are very frequent in the world.
[b]This paragraph was added in Edition K.
[c]This paragraph was added in Edition K.
[d]This paragraph is not in Edition D.
[e]This note is not in Edition D.
[f]This sentence was added in Edition Q.
[g]This note was added in Edition K.
[h]This sentence was added in Edition K.
[i]The following variant, which first appeared as a note in Edition K, is mistakenly
included by Green and Grose as Hume’s final version of the note. The 1777 edition
has instead a revised note, which is incorporated as footnote 10 in the text of the
present edition:
I am apt to suspect the negroes, and in general all the other species of men (for there
are four or five different kinds) to be naturally inferior to the whites. There never was
a civilized nation of any other complexion than white, nor even any individual
eminent either in action or speculation. No ingenious manufactures amongst them, no
arts, no sciences. On the other hand, the most rude and barbarous of the whites, such
as the ancient Germans, the present Tartars, have still something eminent about them,
in their valour, form of government, or some other particular. Such a uniform and
constant difference could not happen, in so many countries and ages, if nature had not
made an original distinction betwixt these breeds of men. Not to mention our
colonies, there are Negroe slaves dispersed all over Europe, of which none ever
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 452 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
discovered any symptoms of ingenuity; tho’ low people, without education, will start
up amongst us, and distinguish themselves in every profession. In Jamaica indeed
they talk of one negroe as a man of parts and learning; but ’tis likely he is admired for
very slender accomplishments, like a parrot, who speaks a few words plainly.
[j]This sentence and the previous one were added in Edition K.
[k]This sentence was added in Edition K; and the next in Edition M.
[l]This sentence was added in Edition R.
[a]This Note was first given in Edition M.
[a]On commerce, luxury, money, interest, &c. Editions H to M.
[a]In Editions H to M this Essay is headed: Of Luxury.
[b]The Grecian and Asiatic luxury: Editions H to K.
[c]Luxury or refinement on pleasure has, &c.: Editions H to M.
[d]The Gothic barons: Editions H to N.
[e]Prodigality is not to be confounded with a refinement in the arts. It even appears,
that that vice is much less frequent in the cultivated ages. Industry and gain beget this
frugality, among the lower and middle ranks of men; and in all the busy professions.
Men of high rank, indeed, it may be pretended, are more allured by the pleasures,
which become more frequent. But idleness is the great source of prodigality at all
times; and there are pleasures and vanities in every age, which allure men equally
when they are unacquainted with better enjoyments. Not to mention, that the high
interest, payed in rude times, quickly consumes the fortunes of the landed gentry, and
multiplies their necessities.—Edition P in the text.
[a]Thrice: Editions H to P.
[b]This note was added in Ed. K.
[c]Editions H to P add: For to these only I all along address myself. ’Tis enough that I
submit to the ridicule sometimes, in this age, attached to the character of a
philosopher, without adding to it that which belongs to a projector.
[d]This last sentence is entered, to be added, in the list of errata in H: it was
incorporated in the text of I.
[e]Magazines and: first added in Edition Q.
[f]For seed and: first added in Edition R.
[g]Editions H and I read: Seven millions . . . a tenth part.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 453 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[h]Editions H to P read: The stated club at the inns.
[a]Value, arising from the agreement and convention of men: Editions H to P.
[b]Editions H to N add: I have been informed by a very eminent lawyer, and a man of
great knowledge and observation, that it appears from antient papers and records, that,
about four centuries ago, money in Scotland, and probably in other parts of Europe,
was only at five per cent. and afterwards rose to ten before the discovery of the WestIndies.
The fact is curious; but might easily be reconciled to the foregoing reasoning.
Men, in that age, lived so much at home, and in so very simple and frugal a manner,
that they had no occasion for money; and though the lenders were then few, the
borrowers were still fewer. The high rate of interest among the early Romans is
accounted for by historians from the frequent losses sustained by the inroads of the
enemy.
[a]For this sentence Editions H to M read: I have been told, that many old acts of
parliament show the same ignorance in the nature of Commerce. And to this day, in a
neighbouring kingdom, &c.
Edition N reads: There are proofs in many old acts of the Scotch parliament of the
same ignorance in the nature of commerce. And to this day, in France, &c.
[b]Editions H and I read: An author, who has more humour than knowledge, more
taste than judgment, and more spleen, prejudice, and passion than any of these
qualities.
[c]Editions H to N read: With which we are in this kingdom so much infatuated.
[d]This paragraph does not occur in Editions H to N.
[e]This paragraph does not occur in Editions H to N.
[f]Editions H to N resume: But as our darling projects of paper-credit are pernicious,
being almost, &c.
[g]Editions H to P read: 1,700,000.
[h]Editions H to P read: A sum greater than that of Harry VII. (There were about eight
ounces of silver in a pound sterling in Harry VII.’s time.)
[i]This sentence is not in Editions H and I.
[a]Editions H and L add as a note: There have strong suspicions, of late, arisen among
critics, and, in my opinion, not without reason, concerning the first ages of the Roman
history; as if they were almost entirely fabulous, ’till after the sacking of the city by
the Gauls; and were even doubtful for some time afterwards, ’till the Greeks began to
give attention to Roman affairs, and commit them to writing. This scepticism,
however, seems to me, scarcely defensible in its full extent, with regard to the
domestic history of Rome, which has some air of truth and probability, and cou’d
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 454 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
scarce be the invention of an historian, who had so little morals or judgment as to
indulge himself in fiction and romance. The revolutions seem so well proportion’d to
their causes: The progress of the factions is so conformable to political experience:
The manners and maxims of the age are so uniform and natural, that scarce any real
history affords more just reflection and improvement. Is not Machiavel’s comment on
Livy (a work surely of great judgment and genius) founded entirely on this period,
which is represented as fabulous. I wou’d willingly, therefore, in my private
sentiments, divide the matter with these critics; and allow, that the battles and
victories and triumphs of those ages had been extremely falsify’d by family memoirs,
as Cicero says they were: But as in the accounts of domestic factions, there were two
opposite relations transmitted to posterity, this both serv’d as a check upon fiction,
and enabled latter historians to gather some truth from comparison and reasoning.
Half of the slaughter which Livy commits on the Æqui and the Volsci, would
depopulate France and Germany; and that historian, tho’ perhaps he may be justly
charged as superficial, is at last shock’d himself with the incredibility of his narration.
The same love of exaggeration seems to have magnify’d the numbers of the Romans
in their armies, and census.
[b]Editions H to P proceed as follows: Europe has now, for above a century, remained
on the defensive against the greatest force that ever, perhaps, was formed by the civil
or political combination of mankind. And such is the influence of the maxim here
treated of, that tho’ that ambitious nation, in the five last general wars, have been
victorious in four,1 and unsuccessful only in one,2 they have not much enlarged their
dominions, nor acquired a total ascendant over Europe. There remains rather room to
hope, that, by maintaining the resistance for some time, the natural revolutions of
human affairs, together with unforeseen events and accidents, may guard us against
universal monarchy, and preserve the world from so great an evil.
In the three last of these general wars, Britain has stood foremost in the glorious
struggle; and she still maintains her station, as guardian of the general liberties of
Europe, and patron of mankind.
[c]Editions H to O: Such as Europe is at present threatened with.
[a]Editions H to P read: Among those whom in this country we call ways and means
men, and who are denominated Financiers and Maltotiers in France.
[b]Editions H to P insert as follows: ’Tis always observed, in years of scarcity, if it be
not extreme, that the poor labour more, and really live better, than in years of great
plenty, when they indulge themselves in idleness and riot. I have been told, by a
considerable manufacturer, that in the year 1740, when bread and provisions of all
kinds were very dear, his workmen not only made a shift to live, but paid debts, which
they had contracted in former years, that were much more favourable and abundant.1
This doctrine, therefore, with regard to taxes, may be admitted in some degree: But
beware of the abuse. Exorbitant taxes, like extreme necessity, destroy industry, by
producing despair; and even before they reach this pitch, they raise the wages of the
labourer and manufacturer, and heighten the price of all commodities. An attentive
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 455 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
disinterested legislature, will observe the point when the emolument ceases, and the
prejudice begins: But as the contrary character is much more common, ’tis to be
feared that taxes, all over Europe, are multiplying to such a degree, as will intirely
crush all art and industry; tho’, perhaps, their first increase, together with other
circumstances, might have contributed to the growth of these advantages.
[c]This clause was first added in Edition Q.
[d]Editions H to P omit the opening sentences as far as “foreign markets,” and read
instead of them: There is a prevailing opinion, that all taxes, however levied, fall upon
the land at last. Such an opinion may be useful in Britain, by checking the landed
gentlemen, in whose hands our legislature is chiefly lodged, and making them
preserve great regard for trade and industry. But I must confess, that this principle,
tho’ first advanced by a celebrated writer, has so little appearance of reason, that,
were it not for his authority, it had never been received by any body.
[e]The concluding sentence is not in Editions H to O.—Ed. P. reads in its place: No
labour in any commodities, that are exported, can be very considerably raised in the
price, without losing the foreign market; and as some part of almost every
manufactory is exported, this circumstance keeps the price of most species of labour
nearly the same after the imposition of taxes. I may add, that it has this effect upon the
whole: For were any kind of labour paid beyond its proportion, all hands would flock
to it, and would soon sink it to a level with the rest.
[a]Editions H to P add: Beyond the evidence of a hundred demonstrations.
[b]This paragraph was added in Ed. Q.
[c]Editions H to P add: And these puzzling arguments, (for they deserve not the name
of specious) though they could not be the foundation of Lord Orford’s conduct, for he
had more sense; served at least to keep his partizans in countenance, and perplex the
understanding of the nation.
[d]Editions H to P add: There is a word, which is here in the mouth of every body,
and which, I find, has also got abroad, and is much employed by foreign writers,1 in
imitation of the English; and this is, Circulation. This word serves as an account of
every thing; and though I confess, that I have sought for its meaning in the present
subject, ever since I was a school-boy, I have never yet been able to discover it. What
possible advantage is there which the nation can reap by the easy transference of stock
from hand to hand? Or is there any parallel to be drawn from the circulation of other
commodities, to that of chequer-notes and India bonds? Where a manufacturer has a
quick sale of his goods to the merchant, the merchant to the shopkeeper, the
shopkeeper to his customers; this enlivens industry, and gives new encouragement to
the first dealer or the manufacturer and all his tradesmen, and makes them produce
more and better commodities of the same species. A stagnation is here pernicious,
wherever it happens; because it operates backwards, and stops or benumbs the
industrious hand in its production of what is useful to human life. But what
production we owe to Change-alley, or even what consumption, except that of coffee,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 456 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
and pen, ink, and paper, I have not yet learned; nor can one forsee the loss or decay of
any one beneficial commerce or commodity, though that place and all its inhabitants
were for ever buried in the ocean.
But though this term has never been explained by those who insist so much on the
advantages that result from a circulation, there seems, however, to be some benefit of
a similiar kind, arising from our incumbrances: As indeed, what human evil is there,
which is not attended with some advantage? This we shall endeavour to explain, that
we may estimate the weight which we ought to allow it.
[e]Editions H to O add as a note: On this head, I shall observe, without interrupting
the thread of the argument, that the multiplicity of our public debts serves rather to
sink the interest, and that the more the government borrows, the cheaper may they
expect to borrow; contrary to first appearance, and contrary to common opinion. The
profits of trade have an influence on interest. See Essay IV.
[f]The remainder of this paragraph was added in Ed. Q.
[g]Edition P adds: We may also remark, that this increase of prices, derived from
paper-credit, has a more durable and a more dangerous influence than when it arises
from a great increase of gold and silver: Where an accidental overflow of money
raises the price of labor and commodities, the evil remedies itself in a little time: The
money soon flows out into all the neighbouring nations: The prices fall to a level: And
industry may be continued as before; a relief, which cannot be expected, where the
circulating specie consists chiefly of paper, and has no intrinsic value.
[h]Editions H to N read: Are a check upon industry, heighten the price of labour, and
are an oppr. &c.
[i]The six following paragraphs were added in Ed. O.
[j]Editions H to P add the note: In times of peace and security, when alone it is
possible to pay debt, the monied interest are averse to receive partial payments, which
they know not how to dispose of to advantage; and the landed interest are averse to
continue the taxes requisite for that purpose. Why therefore should a minister
persevere in a measure so disagreeable to all parties? For the sake, I suppose, of a
posterity, which he will never see, or of a few reasonable reflecting people, whose
united interest, perhaps, will not be able to secure him the smallest burrough in
England. ’Tis not likely we shall ever find any minister so bad a politician. With
regard to these narrow destructive maxims of politics, all ministers are expert enough.
[k]Editions H to P add: Some neighbouring states practise an easy expedient, by
which they lighten their public debts. The French have a custom (as the Romans
formerly had) of augmenting their money; and this the nation has been so much
familiarised to, that it hurts not public credit, though it be really cutting off at once, by
an edict, so much of their debts. The Dutch diminish the interest without the consent
of their creditors, or, which is the same thing, they arbitrarily tax the funds, as well as
other property. Could we practise either of these methods, we need never be
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 457 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
oppressed by the national debt; and it is not impossible but one of these, or some other
method, may, at all adventures, be tried, on the augmentation of our incumbrances
and difficulties. But people in this country are so good reasoners upon whatever
regards their interests, that such a practice will deceive nobody; and public credit will
probably tumble at once, by so dangerous a trial.
[l]This paragraph appears in Editions H to P as a footnote.
[m]Editions H to P: or rather enemy (for we have but one to dread.)
[a]Editions H to P: Among the people, the most humane and the best natured.
[a]The following footnote appears in Editions H and I: An eminent clergyman in
Edinburgh, having wrote, some years ago, a discourse on the same question with this,
of the populousness of antient nations, was pleas’d lately to communicate it to the
author. It maintain’d the opposite side of the argument, to what is here insisted on,
and contained much erudition and good reasoning. The author acknowledges to have
borrow’d, with some variations, from that discourse, two computations, that with
regard to the number of inhabitants in Belgium, and that with regard to those in
Epirus. If this learned gentleman be prevail’d on to publish his dissertation, it will
serve to give great light into the present question, the most curious and important of
all questions of erudition.
In Editions K to P, the following note is substituted for the preceding: An ingenious
writer has honoured this discourse with an answer, full of politeness, erudition, and
good sense. So learned a refutation would have made the author suspect, that his
reasonings were entirely overthrown, had he not used the precaution, from the
beginning, to keep himself on the sceptical side; and having taken this advantage of
the ground, he was enabled, tho’ with much inferior forces, to preserve himself from a
total defeat. That Reverend gentleman will always find, where his antagonist is so
entrenched, that it will be difficult to force him. Varro, in such a situation, could
defend himself against Hannibal, Pharnaces against Cæsar. The author, however, very
willingly acknowledges, that his antagonist has detected many mistakes both in his
authorities and reasonings; and it was owing entirely to that gentleman’s indulgence,
that many more errors were not remarked. In this edition, advantage has been taken of
his learned animadversions, and the Essay has been rendered less imperfect than
formerly.
[b]Editions H to W add: Were every one coupled as soon as he comes to the age of
puberty. [W is an obvious misprint.]
[c]A country . . . to . . . pasturage, was added in Edition H, and In general . . . to . . .
populous, in Edition Q.
[d]Editions H and I added the misquotation: Partem Italiæ ergastula a solitudine
vindicant.
[e]The remainder of this note was added in Ed. R.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 458 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[f]The remainder of this paragraph was added in Edition M.
[g]And even manufactures executed; added in Edition Q.
[h]This paragraph was added in Edition K.
[i]This reference to Tacitus was added in Edition K.
[j]Of the most abject superstition: Editions H to P.
[k]Infinite: Editions H to P.
[l]Editions H to P add: Could Folard’s project of the column take place (which seems
impracticable1 ) it would render modern battles as destructive as the antient.
[m]Editions H to P add: ’Tis true the same law seems to have continued till the time
of Justinian. But abuses introduced by barbarism are not always corrected by civility.
[n]Editions H to P add: Where bigotted priests are the accusers, judges, and
executioners.
[o]Editions H to Q add: This is a difficulty not cleared up, and even not observed by
antiquarians and historians.
[p]The country in Europe in which I have observed the factions to be most violent,
and party-hatred the strongest, is Ireland. This goes so far as to cut off even the most
common intercourse of civilities between the Protestants and Catholics. Their cruel
insurrections and the severe revenges which they have taken of each other, are the
causes of this mutual ill will, which is the chief source of the disorder, poverty, and
depopulation of that country. The Greek factions I imagine to have been inflamed still
to a higher degree of rage; the revolutions being commonly more frequent, and the
maxims of assassination much more avowed and acknowledged. Editions H to P.
[q]The remainder is not in Editions H to O. P has instead of it: His violent tyranny,
therefore, is a stronger proof of the measures of the age.
[r]The remainder of this paragraph was added in Edition R.
[s]Not less, if not rather—added in Edition M.
[t]The last clause was added in Edition K.
[u]This note was added in Edition R.
[v]This sentence was added in Edition R.
[w]Editions H to M proceed as follows: The critical art may very justly be suspected
of temerity, when it pretends to correct or dispute the plain testimony of ancient
historians by any probable or analogical reasonings: Yet the licence of authors upon
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 459 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
all subjects, particularly with regard to numbers, is so great, that we ought still to
retain a kind of doubt or reserve, whenever the facts advanced depart in the least from
the common bounds of nature and experience. I shall give an instance with regard to
modern history. Sir William Temple tells us, in his memoirs, that having a free
conversation with Charles the II., he took the opportunity of representing to that
monarch the impossibility of introducing into this island the religion and government
of France, chiefly on account of the great force requisite to subdue the spirit and
liberty of so brave a people. “The Romans,” says he, “were forced to keep up twelve
legions for that purpose” (a great absurdity),1 “and Cromwell left an army of near
eighty thousand men.” Must not this last be regarded as unquestioned by future
critics, when they find it asserted by a wise and learned minister of state cotemporary
to the fact, and who addressed his discourse, upon an ungrateful subject, to a great
monarch who was also cotemporary, and who himself broke those very forces about
fourteen years before? Yet, by the most undoubted authority, we may insist, that
Cromwell’s army, when he died, did not amount to half the number here mentioned.2
[x]In digging of mines, and also kept up the number of slaves: Editions H and I. In
digging of mines: K to Q.
[y]This sentence was added in Edition Q.
[z]Diod. Sic. lib. 15 and 17: Editions H and I, and omit the rest of this note.
[aa]The remainder of the paragraph was added in Edition K.
[bb]Deducting some few garrisons: not in F and G.
[cc]This paragraph was added in Edition K.
[dd]Editions H and I add the following note, in place of the following paragraph: A
late French writer, in his observations on the Greeks, has remark’d, that Philip of
Macedon, being declar’d captain-general of the Greeks, wou’d have been back’d by
the force of 230,000 of that nation in his intended expedition against Persia. This
number comprehends, I suppose, all the free citizens, throughout all the cities; but the
authority, on which that compilation is founded, has, I own, escap’d either my
memory or reading; and that writer, tho’ otherwise very ingenious, has given into a
bad practice, of delivering a great deal of erudition, without one citation. But
supposing, that that enumeration cou’d be justify’d by good authority from antiquity,
we may establish the following computation. The free Greeks of all ages and sexes
were 920,000. The slaves, computing them by the number of Athenian slaves as
above, who seldom marry’d or had families, were double the male citizens of full age,
viz. 460,000. And the whole inhabitants of antient Greece about one million, three
hundred and eighty thousand. No mighty number nor much exceeding what may be
found at present in Scotland, a country of nearly the same extent, and which is very
indifferently peopl’d.
[ee]This paragraph was added in Edition K.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 460 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[ff]The next two sentences are not in Editions H to K: and the latter was added in
Edition R.
[gg]Editions H and I read as follows: The sum of fighting men in all the States of
Belgium was above half a million; the whole inhabitants two millions. And Belgium
being about the fourth of Gaul, that country might contain eight millions, which is
scarce above the third of its present inhabitants.
[hh]“Near” was added in Edition R.
[ii]“who . . . Plebes” not in Editions H and I.
[jj]The remainder of the paragraph was added in Edition N.
[kk]Editions H and I add: A man of violent imagination, such as Tertullian, augments
everything equally; and for that reason his comparative judgments are the most to be
depended on.
[a]An Elizabeth or a Henry the 4th of France: Editions D to P.
[b]Or . . . equality: added in Edition Q.
[c]This paragraph was added in Edition R.
[d]The two following paragraphs were added in Edition K.
[e]This paragraph and the next were added in Edition K.
[f]This paragraph was added in Edition R.
[g]The latter half of this sentence was added in Edition K.
[h]Edition D omits from this sentence down to “monarchies” on page 485: and
substitutes as follows—The Discussion of these Matters would lead us entirely
beyond the Compass of these Essays. ’Tis sufficient for our present Purpose, if we
have been able to determine, in general, the Foundation of that Allegiance, which is
due to the established Government, in every Kingdom and Commonwealth. When
there is no legal Prince, who has a Title to a Throne, I believe it may safely be
determined to belong to the first Occupier. This was frequently the Case with the
Roman Empire.
[i]Allows: Editions K to P.
[j]In Edition D the remainder of this paragraph is given in continuation of note 17.
[k]This sentence was added in Edition M.
[l]Here Editions K to P subjoin in a note what is now the concluding paragraph of the
Essay.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 461 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[m]At this point Editions D to P stop. Editions K to P give the two next paragraphs as
a note; they have already given the concluding one as a note on page 486, following
“government.”
[a]Or a Caracalla: Edition D; or a Philip: Editions K to P.
[a]And practical: added in Edition R.
[b]Editions M to Q append the note: The author believes that he was the first writer
who advanced that the family of Tudor possessed in general more authority than their
immediate predecessors: An opinion, which, he hopes, will be supported by history,
but which he proposes with some diffidence. There are strong symptoms of arbitrary
power in some former reigns, even after signing of the charters. The power of the
crown in that age depended less on the constitution than on the capacity and vigour of
the prince who wore it.
[c]Gothic: Editions M to Q.
[a]Gothic: Editions H to N.
[b]For this sentence and the next, Editions H to P read as follows; K to P, in a note: It
appears from the speeches, and proclamations, and whole train of King James I.’s
actions, as well as his son’s, that they considered the English government as a simple
monarchy, and never imagined that any considerable part of their subjects entertained
a contrary idea. This made them discover their pretensions, without preparing any
force to support them; and even without reserve or disguise, which are always
employed by those, who enter upon any new project, or endeavour to innovate in any
government. King James told his parliament plainly, when they meddled in state
affairs, Ne sutor ultra crepidam. He used also, at his table, in promiscuous companies,
to advance his notions, in a manner still more undisguised: As we may learn from a
story told in the life of Mr. Waller, and which that poet used frequently to repeat.
When Mr. Waller was young, he had the curiosity to go to court; and he stood in the
circle, and saw King James dine, where, amongst other company, there sat at table
two bishops. The King, openly and aloud, proposed this question, Whether he might
not take his subjects money, when he had occasion for it, without all this formality of
parliament? The one bishop readily replied, God forbid you should not: For you are
the breath of our nostrils. The other bishop declined answering, and said he was not
skilled in parliamentary cases: But upon the King’s urging him, and saying he would
admit of no evasion, his lordship replied very pleasantly, Why, then, I think your
majesty may lawfully take my brother’s money: For he offers it. In Sir Walter
Raleigh’s preface to the History of the World, there is this remarkable passage. Philip
II. by strong hand and main force, attempted to make himself not only an absolute
monarch over the Netherlands, like unto the kings and sovereigns of England and
France; but Turk-like, to tread under his feet all their natural and fundamental laws,
privileges, and antient rights.Spenser, speaking of some grants of the English kings to
the Irish corporations, says, “All which, tho’, at the time of their first grant, they were
tolerable, and perhaps reasonable, yet now are most unreasonable and inconvenient.
But all these will easily be cut off with the superior power of her majesty’s
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 462 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
prerogative, against which her own grants are not to be pleaded or inforced.” State
ofIreland, p. 1537. Edit. 1706.
As these were very common, if not, perhaps, the universal notions of the times, the
two first princes of the house of Stuart were the more excusable for their mistake. And
Rapin,1 suitable to his usual malignity and partiality, seems to treat them with too
much severity, upon account of it.
[c]Blinded them: Editions H to N.
[d]For the remainder of this sentence, Editions H to P substitute: While we stand the
bulwark against oppression, and the great antagonist of that power which threatens
every people with conquest and subjection.
[e]Editions H to P add the note: Those who consider how universal this pernicious
practice of lending has become all over Europe, may perhaps dispute this last opinion.
But we lay under less necessity than other states.
[f]Editions H to P add the following paragraph: The advantages which result from a
parliamentary title, preferably to an hereditary one, tho’ they are great, are too refined
ever to enter into the conception of the vulgar. The bulk of mankind would never
allow them to be sufficient for committing what would be regarded as an injustice to
the prince. They must be supported by some gross, popular, and familar topics; and
wise men, though convinced of their force, would reject them, in compliance with the
weakness and prejudices of the people. An incroaching tyrant or deluded bigot alone,
by his misconduct, is able to enrage the nation, and render practicable what was
always perhaps desirable.
[g]Editions H to P insert the following paragraph: In the last war, it has been of
service to us, by furnishing us with a considerable body of auxiliary troops, the
bravest and most faithful in the world. The Elector of Hanover is the only
considerable prince in the empire, who has pursued no separate end, and has raised up
no stale pretensions, during the late commotions of Europe; but has acted, all along,
with the dignity of a King of Britain. And ever since the accession of that family, it
would be difficult to show any harm we have ever received from the electoral
dominions, except that short disgust in 1718, with Charles XII., who, regulating
himself by maxims very different from those of other princes; made a personal quarrel
of every public injury.1
[h]The virulent acrimony: Editions H to N.
[i]Editions H to P add: The conduct of the Saxon family, where the same person can
be a Catholic King and Protestant Elector, is, perhaps, the first instance, in modern
times, of so reasonable and prudent a behaviour. And the gradual progress of the
Catholic superstition does, even there, prognosticate a speedy alteration: After which,
’tis justly to be apprehended, that persecutions will put a speedy period to the
Protestant religion in the place of its nativity.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 463 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[j]Editions H to P add: For my part, I esteem liberty so invaluable a blessing in
society, that whatever favours its progress and security, can scarce be too fondly
cherished by every one who is a lover of human kind.
[a]Editions H to P begin as follows: Of all mankind there are none so pernicious as
political projectors, if they have power; nor so ridiculous, if they want it: As on the
other hand, a wise politician is the most beneficial character in nature, if accompanied
with authority; and the most innocent, and not altogether useless, even if deprived of
it.
[b]Editions H and I read: Let all the freeholders in the country parishes, and those
who pay scot and lot in the town-parishes, &c. K to P, read: Let all the freeholders of
ten pounds a year in the country, and all the householders worth 200 pounds in the
town-parishes, &c.
[c]Editions H to B add: Good sense is one thing: But follies are numberless; and every
man has a different one. The only way of making a people wise, is to keep them from
uniting into large assemblies.
[d]Brigue: Editions H to P.
[e]By almost the whole body of the people: so Editions H to M end the paragraph.
[f]Formerly one of the wisest and most renowned governments in the world: Editions
H to P.
[g]Of the republican parliament: Editions H to P.
[h]A hundred a year: Editions H and I.
[i]Whose behaviour, in former parliaments, destroyed entirely the authority of that
house: Editions H to P.
[j]Editions H to P add: It is evident, that this is a mortal distemper in the British
government, of which it must at last inevitably perish. I must, however, confess, that
Sweden seems, in some measure, to have remedied this inconvenience, and to have a
militia, with its limited monarchy, as well as a standing army, which is less dangerous
than the British.
[a]Editions A and B, 1741–2, insert the following paragraph: I was lately lamenting to
a Friend of mine, who loves a Conceit, That popular Applause should be bestowed
with so little Judgment, and that so many empty forward Coxcombs should rise up to
a Figure in the World: Upon which he said there was nothing surprising in the Case.
Popular Fame, says he, is nothing but Breath or Air; and Air very naturally presses
into a Vacuum.
[a]The reference to Lucretius was added in Edition K.
[Good offices:]acts of good, voluntarily tendered.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 464 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Touched with contempt:]affected by another’s undervaluing or scorn.
[Pungent:]piercing, sharp.
[Sensibility:]quickness of perception; a disposition to being easily or strongly
affected; delicacy.
[Nobler arts:]the liberal arts or sciences. “Arts that respect the mind were ever
reputed nobler than those that serve the body”—Ben Jonson (quoted in Samuel
Johnson’s Dictionary, under “Art”).
[Relish:]taste; delight in; power of perceiving excellence.
[Incommodious:]inconvenient; vexatious.
[Melancholy:]pensiveness; quietly serious thoughtfulness, sadness, or longing.
[Nice:]accurate in judgment to minute exactness; superfluously exact.
[Vacancy:]emptiness; sense of longing.
[Want:]need; deficiency.
[Sensibly:]quickly; keenly.
[Bottle companion:]drinking friend.
[Mean:]lacking dignity; spiritless; low in worth or power.
[Pusillanimous:]mean-spirited; cowardly.
[Entertain jealousy:]regard with suspicious fear, vigilance, or caution.
[Want:]absence.
[Licentiousness:]boundless liberty; contempt of just restraint.
[Rouzed:]aroused; excited to thought or action.
[Animated:]encouraged; incited.
[Levity:]inconstancy or changeableness; unsteadiness; trifling gaiety.
[Artifice:]trickery; fraud; stratagem.
[Faction:]tumult, discord, or dissention, especially as arising from disputes among
civil or religious parties.
[Humours:]general turn or temper of mind; present disposition.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 465 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Affected popularity:]tried to please the crowd.
[Licentious:]unrestrained by law or morality.
[Fiefs:]estates.
[Doge:]title of the chief magistrate of the republic of Venice.
[Factions:]contending parties in a state.
[Elevation:]exaltation; dignity.
[Proscription:]a sentence of death and confiscation of one’s property.
[Païs conquis:]conquered lands.
[Meanness:]want of dignity; low rank.
[Desert:]degree of merit or demerit.
[Enow:]the plural of enough.
[Panegyric:]a eulogy or encomium; high praise.
[Religious:]exact; strict.
[Fain:]to wish; to desire fondly.
[A woman from the stews:]a prostitute.
[Pro aris & focis:]in defense of our altars and our fires.
[Soldan:]sultan; the supreme ruler of one or another of the great Mohammedan
powers or countries of the Middle Ages.
[Mamalukes:]members of the military body, originally composed of Caucasian slaves,
that seized the throne of Egypt in 1254 and continued to form the ruling class in that
country during the eighteenth century.
[Prætorian bands:]the bodyguards of the emperors of ancient Rome.
[Prodigal:]lavish; wasteful.
[In no stead:]to no advantage.
[Palliate:]to cover with excuse; to extenuate or soften by favorable representations.
[Appellation:]name or title.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 466 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Peculiar:]appropriate; belonging to any one with exclusion of others.
[Tyes:]ties; bonds or obligations.
[Factitious:]made by art, in opposition to what is made by nature.
[Exclaims:]cries out.
[Probity:]honesty; sincerity; veracity.
[Ascendant:]superiority; elevation.
[Refractory:]obstinate; stubborn; perverse; unmanageable; rebellious.
[Intestine:]internal; domestic.
[Owned:]acknowledged.
[Courts:]jurisdictions; authorities.
[Violent:]forceful.
[Temerity:]great boldness; rashness.
[Ecclesiastical preferments:]places of honor or profit in the church.
[Byass:]bias; propensity or inclination.
[Specious:]plausible; beautiful.
[God’s vicegerent:]God’s lieutenant; someone entrusted with power by God.
[Risque:]risk.
[Durst I:]If I dared.
[Period:]end or conclusion.
[In his closet:]in privacy or retirement.
[Euthanasia:]easy death.
[Extirpating:]rooting out; eradicating.
[Aliment:]nourishment; food.
[Contrariety:]opposition; inconsistency; a quality or position destructive of its
opposites.
[Discover:]show; exhibit.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 467 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Christendom:]the collective body of Christianity; the regions in which the inhabitants
profess the Christian religion.
[Generous:]daring; vigorous; liberal.
[Counterpoise:]counterweight; equivalence of force in the opposite side.
[Pernicious:]mischievous in the highest degree; destructive.
[Unaccountable:]not explicable; not to be solved by reason; not reducible to rule.
[Credulity:]easiness of belief; a readiness to credit.
[Sublunary:]earthly; of this world.
[Raptures:]violent seizures; violence of any pleasing passion; uncommon heat of
imagination.
[Transports:]raptures; ecstasy.
[Illapses:]sudden attacks; emissions or entrances of one thing into another.
[Addresses:]petitions.
[Incensed:]angry; enraged.
[Diffident:]lacking in confidence.
[Egregious:]eminent; remarkable; extraordinary.
[Votaries:]those devoted, as by a vow, to any particular service, worship, study, or
state of life.
[Remissness:]carelessness; negligence; lack of ardor; inattention.
[The Romish church:]the Roman Catholic church.
[Sectaries:]persons who divide from public establishment and join with those
distinguished by some particular whims; followers of a particular sect.
[Regular:]methodical; strict; orderly.
[Infirmity:]weakness; failing; disease or malady.
[Abject:]mean; worthless; base; groveling.
[Prerogative:]exclusive or peculiar privilege or right; preeminence; superiority.
[Divines:]ministers or priests; theologians.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 468 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Splenetic:]fretful; peevish.
[Odious:]hateful; detestable.
[Subjoin:]to add afterward.
[Tincture:]color or taste superadded by something.
[Just:]exact; accurate; orderly.
[Head:]topic of discourse.
[Internal police:]the regulation and government of a city or country, so far as regards
the inhabitants.
[Beggars:]impoverishes.
[Canvassed:]examined; debated or discussed.
[The pathetic:]that which moves the passions.
[Sublime:]grand or lofty in style.
[Chaste:]pure; uncorrupt.
[Adulterate:]corrupted with some foreign mixture.
[Taper:]a candle.
[Meridian sun:]the noonday sun.
[Resolution:]settled thought; determination of a cause.
[Give a propriety to:]to justify.
[Nicety:]minute accuracy of thought; exact discrimination; subtlety.
[Chimæra:]a vain and wild fancy, as remote from reality as the existence of the
poetical Chimera, a monster feigned to have the head of a lion, the belly of a goat, and
the tail of a dragon.
[Bashaws:]form of the Turkish title Pasha, meaning head or chief.
[Cadis:]town or village judges among the Turks or other peoples.
[Stop:]obstruction; hindrance; check.
[Ere:]before.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 469 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Rant:]high-sounding language unsupported by dignity of thought.
[Foppery:]foolish ostentation; idle affectation; impertinence.
[Muscovites:]Russians.
[Garniture:]ornament.
[Mortification:]humiliation; subjection of the passions.
[Under-workman:]an inferior or subordinate laborer.
[Drapery:]the dress of the figures in a painting.
[Enthusiasm:]heat of imagination; elevation of fancy.
[Impetuosity:]force.
[Odoriferous:]fragrant; sweetly scented.
[Bowers:]a sheltered place covered with green trees, twined and bent.
[Chearful:]cheerful.
[The schools:]systems of doctrine as delivered by particular teachers.
[Debauch:]fit of intemperance; excess.
[Wanton:]frolicsome; gay; sportive; airy.
[Calumny:]slander; false charges; groundless accusations.
[Ravished:]enraptured; ecstatic; overcome by a pleasing violence.
[Transported:]put in ecstasy; ravished with pleasure.
[Fabulous:]feigned; the product of fables or invented tales.
[Loose:]liberty; freedom from restraint.
[Jollity:]in a disposition to noisy mirth.
[Emergence:]an emergency; any sudden occasion or pressing necessity.
[Timorous:]fearful.
[Sloth:]laziness; sluggishness; idleness.
[Aurora:]The goddess who opens the gates of the day; poetically, the morning.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 470 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Lassitude:]weariness; fatigue.
[Pile:]an edifice; a building.
[At adventures:]by chance; without any rational scheme.
[Scholastic:]adherent of a school; one who is needlessly subtle.
[Palpable:]perceptible by the touch; plain; easily perceptible.
[Mortify:]to subdue.
[Nerves:]the organs of sensation passing from the brain to all parts of the body.
[Dropsy:]a collection of water in the body, from too lax a tone in the solids, whereby
digestion is weakened and all the parts stuffed.
[Puerile:]childish; boyish.
[Voluptuous:]given to excess of pleasure.
[Phthisis:]a consumption, or wasting of the body, arising from any one of several
causes, such as an ulcerated state of the lungs.
[Imbecility:]weakness; feebleness.
[Phlegm:]sluggishness; dullness.
[Municipal laws:]the civil or positive laws of a state, as distinguished from laws of
nature and laws of nations.
[Condition:]superior rank.
[Seraglio:]a palace or residence of a sultan; a harem; a house or part of a house
allotted to women in a Muslim household and designed for maximum seclusion.
[Humour:]temper of mind; disposition.
[Doom:]destruction.
[Establishment:]standing; income.
[Waterman:]a ferryman; a boatman.
[La belle nature:]nature as beautified or adorned by art.
[Epistolary:]suitable to letters.
[Copious:]not confined; diffuse.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 471 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Toilettes:]the receptions of visitors by a lady during the concluding stages of her
process of dressing; very fashionable in the eighteenth century.
[Arcadia:]a mountainous district in the southern peninsula of Greece, taken in
literature as an ideal region of rural contentment.
[Conceit:]pleasant fancy; gaity of imagination; acuteness; pleasant thought.
[Vulgar:]those with common or untrained minds, as distinguished here from “men of
sense.”
[Complexion:]quality or character.
[Ingenious:]noble or liberal.
[Similitude:]likeness; resemblance.
[Knot:]any bond of association or union; a confederacy; a small band.
[Rusticity:]qualities of one who lives in the country; simplicity; artlessness; rudeness;
savageness.
[Phlegmatic:]dull; cold; frigid.
[The Franks:]from the third century ad onward, a generic name for the Germanic
tribes that established themselves in western Europe; a western European.
[Muscovite:]Russian.
[Effeminate:]soft; voluptuous; feminine.
[Vulgar:]commonplace.
[Coxcomb:]a superficial pretender to knowledge or accomplishments; a fop.
[Subtilize:]to make less gross or coarse; to refine.
[Numbers:]verses; poetry.
[Dolce peccante:]sweet sinning.
[Wrought:]produced; worked.
[Remark:]to observe; to distinguish; to point out.
[Scruples:]doubts; hesitates.
[Fustian:]a high swelling kind of writing made up of heterogeneous parts, or of words
and ideas ill associated; bombast.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 472 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Habitudes:]states with regard to something else; relations.
[Florid:]embellished; brilliant with decorations.
[Palls:]makes insipid or vapid.
[Specious:]pleasing to the view; plausible.
[Pathetic:]affecting the passions; moving.
[Victuals:]provision of food; stores for the support of life.
[Ruffs:]puckered linen ornaments, formerly worn about the neck.
[Fardingales:]farthingales; hoops or padded rolls once worn about the hips to spread
the petticoat to a wide circumference.
[Complaisance:]the act of yielding to the desire or demand of another; submission.
[Entrench on:]encroach or trespass upon.
[Circumstantial:]detailed.
[Burthens:]burdens.
[Amor patriæ:]love of country.
[On a sudden:]sooner than was expected; without the natural or commonly
accustomed preparations.
[Retrench:]to cut off; to live with less magnificence or expense.
[Abatement:]lessening; diminution.
[Wonted:]accustomed; usual.
[Engrossed:]seized; appropriated.
[Sorry:]worthless.
[Fallow:]unplowed; uncultivated.
[Grasiers:]those who feed cattle.
[Police:]order; regulation; administration.
[Porter:]a kind of beer, dark brown in color and bitter in taste, which originally was
drunk chiefly by porters and the lower class of laborers.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 473 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Subject:]that which can be drawn upon or utilized; means of doing something.
[Expense:]expenditures.
[Libertine:]licentious.
[Recruits:]resupplies; replenishes.
[Fund:]stock that can be drawn upon; supply.
[Apace:]speedily.
[Billet-doux:]a love letter.
[Discovered:]revealed; divulged.
[Bias:]regular course; inclination.
[Inveterate:]obstinate by long continuance.
[Tragical:]calamitous; dreadful.
[Undaunted:]unsubdued by fear; bold; intrepid.
[Ortolans:]small birds accounted very delicious.
[Dearness:]high price.
[Specie:]coined money.
[Overplus:]surplus.
[Numerary:]of or pertaining to a number or numbers.
[Tell out:]count out.
[For futurity:]for time to come.
[Occupation:]employment; business.
[Somewhat:]something.
[Offer:]price bid.
[Repletion:]the state of being over full.
[Recruits:]new supplies.
[Absentees:]proprietors who live elsewhere.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 474 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Plate:]silverware.
[Finds surety:]gives a pledge, bond, guarantee, or security for the fulfillment of an
undertaking.
[Repine:]to be vexed or discontented by something.
[Factors:]agents for another; those who transact business for another in mercantile
affairs.
[Romance:]a fable or tale, as distinguished from an authentic history.
[Jealousy of:]zeal in guarding.
[Barred:]Hume’s meaning is “would have barred.”
[Funding:]converting into a more or less permanent debt bearing regular interest.
[Supine:]negligent; thoughtless; inattentive.
[Downfal:]downfall.
[Scritoire:]a type of large cabinet with drawers and the convenience of a table to write
upon; a bureau.
[Boxes:]a box under the driver’s seat on a coach; hence, in general, the seat on which
the driver sits.
[Adieu:]farewell.
[Projectors:]those who form visionary or impracticable schemes or designs.
[Cudgel-playing:]a fighting or sporting contest with short heavy sticks or clubs.
[Faith:]trust in the nation’s credit-worthiness.
[Exchequer:]the court to which are brought all the revenues belonging to the crown.
[Trepan:]to catch; to ensnare.
[Bugbear:]a frightful object; a walking specter, imagined to be seen—generally used
in the eighteenth century for a false terror to frighten babes.
[Irrefragable:]not to be refuted; superior to argumental opposition.
[Pupillage:]state of being still like a pupil.
[Straitened:]reduced to hardship or privation.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 475 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Raree-shows:](formed in imitation of the foreign way of pronouncing rare shows):
shows carried in boxes.
[Paralogism:]a false argument.
[They had:]they would have.
[Repine:]fret; vex oneself; be discontented.
[Event:]the consequence of an action; the conclusion; the upshot.
[Prepossessions:]preoccupations; preconceived opinions or prejudices.
[Wrested:]distorted.
[Bottom:]foundation; groundwork.
[Of a piece:]consistent; in harmony or agreement.
[Poise:]weight.
[Essay:]attempt; endeavor; trial.
[Antiquated:]obsolete; out of date.
[Sacerdotal:]priestly; here, the papal office.
[Casting:]deciding; decisive.
[Session:]the right to sit or occupy a seat.
[Break:]to dismiss; to deprive of a commission or rank.
[Aphorisms:]principles or precepts expressed in a few words.
[Belles Lettres:]polite, refined, or elegant literature.
[Affect:]to be fond of or pleased with.
[Parterre:]the part of the floor of a theater behind the orchestra.
[Phisiognomy:]physiognomy; the face or countenance, especially viewed as an index
to the mind and character.
[Put a Violence upon:]to apply severe or undue constraint to some natural process or
habit so as to prevent its free development or exercise.
[Subscribing:]attesting by writing one’s name.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 476 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[Arrant:]bad in a high degree; notorious; complete; manifest.
[Satyr:]satire.
[Backwardness:]reluctance; disinclination; unwillingness.
[Complexion:]bodily constitution.
[Essays:]the first tentative efforts in learning or practice.
[Brings:]leads by degrees; makes liable to anything.
[Fairly:]completely; plainly; suitably.
[Sophisticated:]adulterated; corrupted with something spurious; not genuine.
[a]In Editions A to N this Essay is introduced by the following examination of the
spirit of parties.
I have frequently observed, in comparing the conduct of the court and country parties,
that the former are commonly less assuming and dogmatical in conversation, more apt
to make concessions; and tho’ not, perhaps, more susceptible of conviction, yet more
able to bear contradiction than the latter; who are apt to fly out upon any opposition,
and to regard one as a mercenary designing fellow, if he argues with any coolness and
impartiality, or makes any concessions to their adversaries. This is a fact, which, I
believe, every one may have observed, who has been much in companies where
political questions have been discussed; tho’, were one to ask the reason of this
difference, every party would be apt to assign a different reason. Gentlemen in the
Opposition will ascribe it to the very nature of their party, which, being founded on
public spirit, and a zeal for the constitution, cannot easily endure such doctrines, as
are of pernicious consequence to liberty. The courtiers, on the other hand, will be apt
to put us in mind of the clown mentioned by lord Shaftsbury. “A clown,” says that
excellent author,1 “once took a fancy to hear the Latin disputes of doctors at an
university. He was asked what pleasure he could take in viewing such combatants,
when he could never know so much, as which of the parties had the better. For that
matter, replied the clown, I a’n’t such a fool neither, but I can see who’s the first that
puts t’other into a passion. Nature herself dictated this lesson to the clown, that he
who had the better of the argument would be easy and well-humoured: But he who
was unable to support his cause by reason would naturally lose his temper and grow
violent.”
To which of these reasons shall we adhere? To neither of them, in my opinion; unless
we have a mind to enlist ourselves and become zealots in either party. I believe I can
assign the reason of this different conduct of the two parties, without offending either.
The country party are plainly most popular at present, and perhaps have been so in
most administrations: So that, being accustomed to prevail in company, they cannot
endure to hear their opinions controverted, but are as confident on the public favour,
as if they were supported in all their sentiments by the most infallible demonstration.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 477 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
The courtiers, on the other hand, are commonly so run down by popular talkers, that if
you speak to them with any moderation, or make them the smallest concessions, they
think themselves extremely beholden to you, and are apt to return the favour by a like
moderation and facility on their part. To be furious and passionate, they know, would
only gain them the character of shameless mercenaries; not that of zealous patriots,
which is the character that such a warm behaviour is apt to acquire to the other party.
In all controversies, we find, without regarding the truth or falshood on either side,
that those who defend the established and popular opinions, are always the most
dogmatical and imperious in their stile: while their adversaries affect almost
extraordinary gentleness and moderation, in order to soften, as much as possible, any
prejudices that may lye against them. Consider the behavior of our free-thinkers of all
denominations, whether they be such as decry all revelation, or only oppose the
exorbitant power of the clergy; Collins, Tindal, Foster, Hoadley. Compare their
moderation and good manners with the furious zeal and scurrility of their adversaries,
and you will be convinced of the truth of my observation. A like difference may be
observed in the conduct of those French writers, who maintained the controversy with
regard to ancient and modern learning. Boileau, Monsieur and Madame Dacier,
l’Abbé de Bos, who defended the party of the ancients, mixed their reasonings with
satire and invective; while Fontenelle, la Motte, Charpentier, and even Perrault, never
transgressed the bounds of moderation and good breeding; though provoked by the
most injurious treatment of their adversaries.
I must, however, observe, that this Remark with regard to the seeming Moderation of
the Court Party, is entirely confin’d to Conversation, and to Gentlemen, who have
been engag’d by Interest or Inclination in that Party. For as to the Court-Writers,
being commonly hir’d Scriblers, they are altogether as scurrilous as the Mercenaries
of the other Party; nor has the Gazeteer any Advantage, in this Respect, above
Common Sense. A man of Education will, in any Party, discover himself to be such,
by his Good-breeding and Decency; as a Scoundrel will always betray the opposite
Qualities. The false Accusers accus’d, &c. is very scurrillous, tho’ that Side of the
Question, being least popular, shou’d be defended with most Moderation. When L—d
B—e, L—d M—t, Mr. L—n take the Pen in Hand, tho’ they write with Warmth, they
presume not upon their Popularity so far as to transgress the Bounds of Decency.
[This paragraph is found only in Editions A and B.]
I am led into this train of reflection, by considering some papers wrote upon that
grand topic of court influence and parliamentary dependence, where, in my humble
opinion, the country party, besides vehemence and satyre, shew too rigid an
inflexibility, and too great a jealousy of making concessions to their adversaries. Their
reasonings lose their force by being carried too far; and the popularity of their
opinions has seduced them to neglect in some measure their justness and solidity. The
following reason will, I hope, serve to justify me in this opinion.
[k]So the Essay concludes in Editions Q and R. In place of the last paragraph, the
preceding Editions read as follows:
’Tis however remarkable, that tho’ the principles of Whig and Tory were both of them
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 478 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
of a compound nature; yet the ingredients, which predominated in both, were not
correspondent to each other. A Tory loved monarchy, and bore an affection to the
family of Stuart; but the latter affection was the predominant inclination of the party.
A Whig loved liberty, and was a friend to the settlement in the Protestant line; but the
love of liberty was professedly his predominant inclination. The Tories have
frequently acted as republicans, where either policy or revenge has engaged them to
that conduct; and there was no one of that party, who, upon the supposition, that he
was to be disappointed in his views with regard to the succession, would not have
desired to impose the strictest limitations on the crown, and to bring our form of
government as near republican as possible, in order to depress the family, which,
according to his apprehension, succeeded without any just title. The Whigs, ’tis true,
have also taken steps dangerous to liberty, under colour of securing the succession
and settlement of the crown, according to their views: But as the body of the party had
no passion for that succession, otherwise than as the means of securing liberty, they
have been betrayed into these steps by ignorance, or frailty, or the interests of their
leaders. The succession of the crown was, therefore, the chief point with the Tories;
the security of our liberties with the Whigs. [The remainder of this paragraph is not in
A and B.] Nor is this seeming irregularity at all difficult to be accounted for, by our
present theory. Court and country parties are the true parents of Tory and Whig. But
’tis almost impossible, that the attachment of the court party to monarchy should not
degenerate into an attachment to the monarch; there being so close a connexion
between them, and the latter being so much the more natural object. How easily does
the worship of the divinity degenerate into a worship of the idol? The connexion is
not so great between liberty, the divinity of the old country party or Whigs, and any
monarch or royal family; nor is it so reasonable to suppose, that in that party, the
worship can be so easily transferred from the one to the other. Tho’ even that would
be no great miracle.
’Tis difficult to penetrate into the thoughts and sentiments of any particular man; but
’tis almost impossible to distinguish those of a whole party, where it often happens,
that no two persons agree precisely in the same maxims of conduct. Yet I will venture
to affirm, that it was not so much principle, or an opinion of indefeasible right, which
attached the Tories to the ancient royal family, as affection, or a certain love and
esteem for their persons. The same cause divided England formerly between the
houses of York and Lancaster, and Scotland between the families of Bruce and Baliol;
in an age, when political disputes were but little in fashion, and when political
principles must of course have had but little influence on mankind. The doctrine of
passive obedience is so absurd in itself, and so opposite to our liberties, that it seems
to have been chiefly left to pulpit-declaimers, and to their deluded followers among
the vulgar. Men of better sense were guided by affection; and as to the leaders of this
party, ’tis probable, that interest was their chief motive, and that they acted more
contrary to their private sentiments, than the leaders of the opposite party. [The
remainder of this paragraph is not in A and B.] Tho’ ’tis almost impossible to
maintain with zeal the right of any person or family, without acquiring a good-will to
them, and changing the principle into affection; yet this is less natural to people of an
elevated station and liberal education, who have had full opportunity of observing the
weakness, folly, and arrogance of monarchs, and have found them to be nothing
superior, if not rather inferior to the rest of mankind. The interest, therefore, of being
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 479 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
heads of a party does often, with such people, supply the place both of principle and
affection.
Some, who will not venture to assert, that the real difference between Whig and Tory
was lost at the revolution, seem inclined to think, that the difference is now abolished,
and that affairs are so far returned to their natural state, that there are at present no
other parties amongst us but court and country; that is, men, who by interest or
principle, are attached either to monarchy or to liberty. It must, indeed, be confest,
that the Tory party seem, of late, to have decayed much in their numbers; still more in
their zeal; and I may venture to say, still more in their credit and authority. There are
few men of knowledge or learning, at least, few philosophers, since Mr. Locke has
wrote, who would not be ashamed to be thought of that party; and in almost all
companies the name of Old Whig is mentioned as an uncontestable appellation of
honour and dignity. Accordingly, the enemies of the ministry, as a reproach, call the
courtiers the true Tories; and as an honour, denominate the gentlemen in the
opposition the true Whigs. [The last two sentences were omitted in P. A and B read no
man, omitting “at least . . . wrote.”] The Tories have been so long obliged to talk in
the republican stile, that they seem to have made converts of themselves by their
hypocrisy, and to have embraced the sentiments, as well as language of their
adversaries. There are, however, very considerable remains of that party in England,
with all their old prejudices; and a proof that court and country are not our only
parties, is, that almost all the dissenters side with the court, and the lower clergy, at
least, of the church of England, with the opposition. This may convince us, that some
biass still hangs upon our constitution, some intrinsic weight, which turns it from its
natural course, and causes a confusion in our parties. [This sentence does not occur in
A.]
I shall conclude this subject with observing that we never had any Tories in Scotland,
according to the proper signification of the word, and that the division of parties in
this country was really into Whigs and Jacobites. A Jacobite seems to be a Tory, who
has no regard to the constitution, but is either a zealous partizan of absolute
monarchy, or at least willing to sacrifice our liberties to the obtaining the succession
in that family to which he is attached. The reason of the difference between England
and Scotland, I take to be this: Political and religious divisions in the latter country,
have been, since the revolution, regularly correspondent to each other. The
Presbyterians were all Whigs without exception: Those who favoured episcopacy, of
the opposite party. And as the clergy of the latter sect were turned out of the churches
at the revolution, they had no motive for making any compliances with the
government in their oaths, or their forms of prayers, but openly avowed the highest
principles of their party; which is the cause why their followers have been more
violent than their brethren of the Tory party in England.1
As violent Things have not commonly so long a Duration as moderate, we actually
find, that the Jacobite Party is almost entirely vanish’d from among us, and that the
Distinction of Court and Country, which is but creeping in at London, is the only one
that is ever mention’d in this kingdom. Beside the Violence and Openness of the
Jacobite party, another Reason has, perhaps, contributed to produce so sudden and so
visible an Alteration in this part of Britain. There are only two Ranks of Men among
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 480 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
us; Gentlemen, who have some Fortune and Education, and the meanest slaving Poor;
without any considerable Number of that middling Rank of Men, which abounds
more in England, both in Cities and in the Country, than in any other Part of the
World. The slaving Poor are incapable of any Principles: Gentlemen may be
converted to true Principles, by Time and Experience. The middling Rank of Men
have Curiosity and Knowledge enough to form Principles, but not enough to form true
ones, or correct any Prejudices that they may have imbib’d: And ’tis among the
middling Rank, that Tory Principles do at present prevail most in England. [This final
paragraph appears only in A and B.]
[a]In Editions A and B, this and the three next paragraphs were written as follows:
My first Reflection is, that Religions, which partake of Enthusiasm are, on their first
Rise, much more furious and violent than those which partake of Superstition; but in a
little Time become much more gentle and moderate. The Violence of this Species of
Religion, when excited by Novelty, and animated by Opposition, appears from
numberless Instances; of the Anabaptists in Germany, the Camisars in France, the
Levellers and other Fanaticks in England, and the Covenanters in Scotland. As
Enthusiasm is founded on strong Spirits and a presumptuous Boldness of Character, it
naturally begets the most extreme Resolutions; especially after it rises to that Height
as to inspire the deluded Fanaticks with the Opinion of Divine Illuminations, and with
a Contempt of the common Rules of Reason, Morality and Prudence.
’Tis thus Enthusiasm produces the most cruel Desolation in human Society: But its
Fury is like that of Thunder and Tempest, which exhaust themselves in a little Time,
and leave the Air more calm and serene than before. The Reason of this will appear
evidently, by comparing Enthusiasm to Superstition, the other Species of false
Religion; and tracing the natural Consequences of each. As Superstition is founded on
Fear, Sorrow, and a Depression of Spirits, it represents the Person to himself in such
despicable Colours, that he appears unworthy, in his own Eyes, of approaching the
Divine Presence, and naturally has Recourse to any other Person, whose Sanctity of
Life, or, perhaps, Impudence and Cunning, have made him be supposed to be more
favoured by the Divinity. To him they entrust their Devotions: To his Care they
recommend their Prayers, Petitions, and Sacrifices: And, by his Means, hope to render
their Addresses acceptable to their incensed Deity. Hence the Origin of Priests1 who
may justly be regarded as one of the grossest Inventions of a timorous and abject
Superstition, which, ever diffident of itself, dares not offer up its own Devotions, but
ignorantly thinks to recommend itself to the Divinity, by the Mediation of his
supposed Friends and Servants. As Superstition is a considerable Ingredient of almost
all Religions, even the most fanatical; there being nothing but Philosophy able to
conquer entirely these unaccountable Terrors; hence it proceeds, that in almost every
Sect of Religion there are Priests to be found: But the stronger Mixture there is of
Superstition, the higher is the Authority of the Priesthood. Modern Judaism and
Popery, especially the latter, being the most barbarous and absurd Superstitions that
have yet been known in the World, are the most enslav’d by their Priests. As the
Church of England may justly be said to retain a strong Mixture of Popish
Superstition, it partakes also, in its original Constitution, of a Propensity to Priestly
Power and Dominion; particularly in the Respect it exacts to the Priest. And though,
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 481 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
according to the Sentiments of that Church, the Prayers of the Priest must be
accompanied with those of the Laity; yet is he the mouth of the Congregation, his
Person is sacred, and without his Presence few would think their public Devotions, or
the Sacraments, and other Rites, acceptable to the Divinity.
On the other Hand, it may be observed, That all Enthusiasts have been free from the
Yoke of Ecclesiastics, and have exprest a great Independence in their Devotion; with
a contempt of Forms, Tradition and Authorities. The Quakers are the most egregious,
tho’, at the same Time, the most innocent, Enthusiasts that have been yet known; and
are, perhaps, the only Sect, that have never admitted Priests among them. The
Independents, of all the English Sectaries, approach nearest to the Quakers in
Fanaticism, and in their Freedom from Priestly Bondage. The Presbyterians follow
after, at an equal Distance in both these Particulars. In short, this Observation is
founded on the most certain Experience; and will also appear to be founded on
Reason, if we consider, that as Enthusiasm arises from a presumptuous Pride and
Confidence, it thinks itself sufficiently qualified to approach the Divinity without any
human Mediator. Its rapturous Devotions are so fervent, that it even imagines itself
actually to approach him by the Way of Contemplation and inward Converse; which
makes it neglect all those outward Ceremonies and Observances, to which the
Assistance of the Priests appears so requisite in the Eyes of their superstitious
Votaries. The Fanatick consecrates himself, and bestows on his own Person a sacred
Character, much superior to what Forms and ceremonious Institutions can confer on
any other.
’Tis therefore an infallible Rule, That Superstition is favourable to Priestly Power, and
Euthusiasm as much, or rather more, contrary to it than sound Reason and Philosophy.
The Consequences are evident. When the first Fire of Enthusiasm is spent, Men
naturally, in such fanatical Sects, sink into the greatest Remissness and Coolness in
Sacred Matters; there being no Body of Men amongst them, endow’d with sufficient
Authority, whose Interest is concerned, to support the religious Spirit. Superstition, on
the contrary, steals in gradually and insensibly; renders Men tame and submissive; is
acceptable to the Magistrate, and seems inoffensive to the People: Till at last the
Priest, having firmly establish’d his Authority, becomes the Tyrant and Disturber of
human Society, by his endless Contentions, Persecutions, and religious Wars. How
smoothly did the Romish Church advance in their Acquisition of Power? But into
what dismal Convulsions did they throw all Europe, in order to maintain it? On the
other Hand, our Sectaries, who were formerly such dangerous Bigots, are now
become our greatest Free-thinkers; and the Quakers are, perhaps, the only regular
Body of Deists in the Universe, except the Literati or Disciples of Confucius in China.
[g]C to P proceed: I have confest that there is something accidental in the origin and
progress of the arts in any nation; and yet I cannot forbear thinking, that if the other
learned and polite nations of Europe had possest the same advantages of a popular
government, they would probably have carried eloquence to a greater height than it
has yet reached in Britain. The French sermons, especially those of Flechier and
Bossuet, are much superior to the English in this particular; and in both these authors
are found many strokes of the most sublime poetry. [C and D: and in Flechier there
are found many strokes of the most sublime poetry. His funeral sermon on the
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 482 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Marechal de Turenne is a good instance.] None but private causes, in that country, are
ever debated before their parliaments or courts of judicature; but notwithstanding this
disadvantage, there appears a spirit of eloquence in many of their lawyers, which,
with proper cultivation and encouragement, might rise to the greatest height. The
pleadings of Patru are very elegant, and give us room to imagine what so fine a genius
could have performed in questions concerning public liberty or slavery, peace or war,
who exerts himself with such success in debates concerning the price of an old horse,
or a gossiping story of a quarrel between an abbess and her nuns. For ’tis remarkable,
that this polite writer, tho’ esteemed by all the men of wit in his time, was never
employed in the most considerable causes of their courts of judicature, but lived and
died in poverty: From an ancient prejudice industriously propagated by the dunces in
all countries, That a man of genius is unfit for business. The disorders produced by the
factions against cardinal Mazarine, made the parliament of Paris enter into the
discussion of public affairs, and during that short interval, there appeared many
symptoms of the revival of ancient eloquence. The avocat generalTalon, in an
oration, invoked on his knees, the spirit of St. Louis to look down with compassion on
his divided and unhappy people, and to inspire them, from above, with the love of
concord and unanimity.1 The members of the French academy have attempted to give
us models of eloquence in their harangues at their admittance: But, having no subject
to discourse upon, they have run altogether into a fulsome strain of panegyric and
flattery, the most barren of all subjects. Their stile, however, is commonly, on these
occasions, very elevated and sublime, and might reach the greatest heights, were it
employed on a subject more favourable and engaging.
There are some circumstances, I confess, in the English temper and genius, which are
disadvantageous to the progress of eloquence, and render all attempts of that kind
more dangerous and difficult among them than among any other nation. The English
are conspicuous for good-sense, which makes them very jealous of any attempts to
deceive them by the flowers of rhetoric and elocution. They are also peculiarly
modest; which makes them consider it as a piece of arrogance to offer any thing but
reason to public assemblies, or attempt to guide them by passion or fancy. I may,
perhaps, be allowed to add, that the people in general are not remarkable for delicacy
of taste, or for sensibility to the charms of the muses. Their musical parts, to use the
expression of a noble author, are but indifferent. Hence their comic poets, to move
them, must have recourse to obscenity; their tragic poets to blood and slaughter: And
hence their orators, being deprived of any such resource, have abandoned altogether
the hopes of moving them, and have confined themselves to plain argument and
reasoning.
These circumstances, joined to particular accidents, may, perhaps, have retarded the
growth of eloquence in this kingdom; but will not be able to prevent its success, if
ever it appear amongst us: And one may safely pronounce, that this is a field, in which
the most flourishing laurels may yet be gathered, if any youth of accomplished genius,
thoroughly acquainted with all the polite arts, and not ignorant of public business,
should appear in parliament, and accustom our ears to an eloquence more
commanding and pathetic. And to confirm me in this opinion, there occur two
considerations, the one derived from ancient, the other from modern times.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 483 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[j]Editions C to P insert: ’Tis but an indifferent compliment, which Horace pays to his
friend Grosphus, in the ode addressed to him. No one, says he, is happy in every
respect. And I may perhaps enjoy some advantages, which you are deprived of. You
possess great riches: Your bellowing herds cover theSicilianplains. Your chariot is
drawn by the finest horses: And you are arrayed in the richest purple. But the
indulgent fates, with a small inheritance, have givenmea fine genius, and have
endowed me with a contempt for the malignant judgments of the vulgar1Phædrus says
to his patron, Eutychus, If you intend to read my works, I shall be pleased: If not, I
shall, at least, have the advantage of pleasing posterity.2 I am apt to think that a
modern poet would not have been guilty of such an impropriety as that which may be
observed in Virgil’s address to Augustus, when, after a great deal of extravagant
flattery, and after having deified the emperor, according to the custom of those times,
he, at last, places this god on the same level with himself. By your gracious nod, says
he, render my undertaking prosperous; and taking pity, together with me, of the
Swains ignorant of husbandry, bestow your favourable influence on this work.3 Had
men, in that age, been accustomed to observe such niceties, a writer so delicate as
Virgil would certainly have given a different turn to this sentence. The court of
Augustus, however polite, had not yet, it seems, worn off the manners of the republic.
[f]Editions C to P add as follows: If a Spanish lady must not be supposed to have legs,
what must be supposed of a Turkish lady? She must not be supposed to have a being
at all. Accordingly, ’tis esteemed a piece of rudeness and indecency at
Constantinople, ever to make mention of a man’s wives before him.1 In Europe, ’tis
true, fine bred people make it also a rule never to talk of their wives. But the reason is
not founded on our jealousy. I suppose it is because we should be apt, were it not for
this rule, to become troublesome to company, by talking too much of them.
The author of the Persian letters has given a different reason for this polite maxim.
Men, says he, never care to mention their wives in company, lest they should talk of
them before people, who are better acquainted with them than themselves.
[b]Editions H to P proceed as follows: Europe has now, for above a century, remained
on the defensive against the greatest force that ever, perhaps, was formed by the civil
or political combination of mankind. And such is the influence of the maxim here
treated of, that tho’ that ambitious nation, in the five last general wars, have been
victorious in four,1 and unsuccessful only in one,2 they have not much enlarged their
dominions, nor acquired a total ascendant over Europe. There remains rather room to
hope, that, by maintaining the resistance for some time, the natural revolutions of
human affairs, together with unforeseen events and accidents, may guard us against
universal monarchy, and preserve the world from so great an evil.
In the three last of these general wars, Britain has stood foremost in the glorious
struggle; and she still maintains her station, as guardian of the general liberties of
Europe, and patron of mankind.
[b]Editions H to P insert as follows: ’Tis always observed, in years of scarcity, if it be
not extreme, that the poor labour more, and really live better, than in years of great
plenty, when they indulge themselves in idleness and riot. I have been told, by a
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 484 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
considerable manufacturer, that in the year 1740, when bread and provisions of all
kinds were very dear, his workmen not only made a shift to live, but paid debts, which
they had contracted in former years, that were much more favourable and abundant.1
This doctrine, therefore, with regard to taxes, may be admitted in some degree: But
beware of the abuse. Exorbitant taxes, like extreme necessity, destroy industry, by
producing despair; and even before they reach this pitch, they raise the wages of the
labourer and manufacturer, and heighten the price of all commodities. An attentive
disinterested legislature, will observe the point when the emolument ceases, and the
prejudice begins: But as the contrary character is much more common, ’tis to be
feared that taxes, all over Europe, are multiplying to such a degree, as will intirely
crush all art and industry; tho’, perhaps, their first increase, together with other
circumstances, might have contributed to the growth of these advantages.
[d]Editions H to P add: There is a word, which is here in the mouth of every body,
and which, I find, has also got abroad, and is much employed by foreign writers,1 in
imitation of the English; and this is, Circulation. This word serves as an account of
every thing; and though I confess, that I have sought for its meaning in the present
subject, ever since I was a school-boy, I have never yet been able to discover it. What
possible advantage is there which the nation can reap by the easy transference of stock
from hand to hand? Or is there any parallel to be drawn from the circulation of other
commodities, to that of chequer-notes and India bonds? Where a manufacturer has a
quick sale of his goods to the merchant, the merchant to the shopkeeper, the
shopkeeper to his customers; this enlivens industry, and gives new encouragement to
the first dealer or the manufacturer and all his tradesmen, and makes them produce
more and better commodities of the same species. A stagnation is here pernicious,
wherever it happens; because it operates backwards, and stops or benumbs the
industrious hand in its production of what is useful to human life. But what
production we owe to Change-alley, or even what consumption, except that of coffee,
and pen, ink, and paper, I have not yet learned; nor can one forsee the loss or decay of
any one beneficial commerce or commodity, though that place and all its inhabitants
were for ever buried in the ocean.
But though this term has never been explained by those who insist so much on the
advantages that result from a circulation, there seems, however, to be some benefit of
a similiar kind, arising from our incumbrances: As indeed, what human evil is there,
which is not attended with some advantage? This we shall endeavour to explain, that
we may estimate the weight which we ought to allow it.
[l]Editions H to P add: Could Folard’s project of the column take place (which seems
impracticable1 ) it would render modern battles as destructive as the antient.
[w]Editions H to M proceed as follows: The critical art may very justly be suspected
of temerity, when it pretends to correct or dispute the plain testimony of ancient
historians by any probable or analogical reasonings: Yet the licence of authors upon
all subjects, particularly with regard to numbers, is so great, that we ought still to
retain a kind of doubt or reserve, whenever the facts advanced depart in the least from
the common bounds of nature and experience. I shall give an instance with regard to
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 485 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
modern history. Sir William Temple tells us, in his memoirs, that having a free
conversation with Charles the II., he took the opportunity of representing to that
monarch the impossibility of introducing into this island the religion and government
of France, chiefly on account of the great force requisite to subdue the spirit and
liberty of so brave a people. “The Romans,” says he, “were forced to keep up twelve
legions for that purpose” (a great absurdity),1 “and Cromwell left an army of near
eighty thousand men.” Must not this last be regarded as unquestioned by future
critics, when they find it asserted by a wise and learned minister of state cotemporary
to the fact, and who addressed his discourse, upon an ungrateful subject, to a great
monarch who was also cotemporary, and who himself broke those very forces about
fourteen years before? Yet, by the most undoubted authority, we may insist, that
Cromwell’s army, when he died, did not amount to half the number here mentioned.2
[b]For this sentence and the next, Editions H to P read as follows; K to P, in a note: It
appears from the speeches, and proclamations, and whole train of King James I.’s
actions, as well as his son’s, that they considered the English government as a simple
monarchy, and never imagined that any considerable part of their subjects entertained
a contrary idea. This made them discover their pretensions, without preparing any
force to support them; and even without reserve or disguise, which are always
employed by those, who enter upon any new project, or endeavour to innovate in any
government. King James told his parliament plainly, when they meddled in state
affairs, Ne sutor ultra crepidam. He used also, at his table, in promiscuous companies,
to advance his notions, in a manner still more undisguised: As we may learn from a
story told in the life of Mr. Waller, and which that poet used frequently to repeat.
When Mr. Waller was young, he had the curiosity to go to court; and he stood in the
circle, and saw King James dine, where, amongst other company, there sat at table
two bishops. The King, openly and aloud, proposed this question, Whether he might
not take his subjects money, when he had occasion for it, without all this formality of
parliament? The one bishop readily replied, God forbid you should not: For you are
the breath of our nostrils. The other bishop declined answering, and said he was not
skilled in parliamentary cases: But upon the King’s urging him, and saying he would
admit of no evasion, his lordship replied very pleasantly, Why, then, I think your
majesty may lawfully take my brother’s money: For he offers it. In Sir Walter
Raleigh’s preface to the History of the World, there is this remarkable passage. Philip
II. by strong hand and main force, attempted to make himself not only an absolute
monarch over the Netherlands, like unto the kings and sovereigns of England and
France; but Turk-like, to tread under his feet all their natural and fundamental laws,
privileges, and antient rights.Spenser, speaking of some grants of the English kings to
the Irish corporations, says, “All which, tho’, at the time of their first grant, they were
tolerable, and perhaps reasonable, yet now are most unreasonable and inconvenient.
But all these will easily be cut off with the superior power of her majesty’s
prerogative, against which her own grants are not to be pleaded or inforced.” State
ofIreland, p. 1537. Edit. 1706.
As these were very common, if not, perhaps, the universal notions of the times, the
two first princes of the house of Stuart were the more excusable for their mistake. And
Rapin,1 suitable to his usual malignity and partiality, seems to treat them with too
much severity, upon account of it.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 486 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[g]Editions H to P insert the following paragraph: In the last war, it has been of
service to us, by furnishing us with a considerable body of auxiliary troops, the
bravest and most faithful in the world. The Elector of Hanover is the only
considerable prince in the empire, who has pursued no separate end, and has raised up
no stale pretensions, during the late commotions of Europe; but has acted, all along,
with the dignity of a King of Britain. And ever since the accession of that family, it
would be difficult to show any harm we have ever received from the electoral
dominions, except that short disgust in 1718, with Charles XII., who, regulating
himself by maxims very different from those of other princes; made a personal quarrel
of every public injury.1
[1. ]Miscellaneous Reflections, 107.
[1. ]Some of the opinions, delivered in these Essays, with regard to the public
transactions in the last century, the Author, on more accurate examination, found
reason to retract in his History of Great Britain. And as he would not enslave himself
to the systems of either party, neither would he fetter his judgment by his own
preconceived opinions and principles; nor is he ashamed to acknowledge his mistakes.
[This note does not occur in any edition prior to M.]
[1. ]By Priests I understand only the Pretenders to Power and Dominion, and to a
superior Sanctity of Character, distinct from Virtue and good Morals. These are very
different from Clergymen, who are set apart [“by the Laws” added in Edition B] to the
care of sacred Matters, and the conducting our public Devotions with greater Decency
and Order. There is no Rank of Men more to be respected than the latter.
[1. ]De Retz’s Memoirs.
[1. ]
———Nihil est ab omni
Parte beatum.
Abstulit clarum cita mors Achillem,
Longa Tithonum minuit senectus,
Et mihi forsan, tibi quod negarit,
Porriget hora.
Te greges centum, Siculæque circum
Mugiunt vaccæ: tibi tollit, hinniTum
apta quadrigis equa: te bis Afro
Murice tinctæ
Vestiunt lanæ: mihi parva rura, &
Spiritum Graiæ tenuem Camœnæ
Parca non mendax dedit & malignum
Spernere vulgus.
Lib. 2. Ode 16.
[2. ]
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 487 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
Quem si leges, lætabor; sin autem minus,
Habebunt certe quo se oblectent posteri.
Lib. 3. Prol. 31.
[3. ]
Ignarosque viæ mecum miseratus agrestes
Ingredere, & votis jam nunc assuesce vocari.
Georg. Lib. 1, 41.
One would not say to a prince or great man, “When you and I were in such a place,
we saw such a thing happen.” But, “When you were in such a place, I attended you:
And such a thing happened.”Here I cannot forbear mentioning a piece of delicacy
observed in France, which seems to me excessive and ridiculous. You must not say,
“That is a very fine dog, Madam.” But, “Madam, that is a very fine dog.” They think
it indecent that those words, dog and madam, should be coupled together in the
sentence; though they have no reference to each other in the sense.After all, I
acknowledge, that this reasoning from single passages of ancient authors may seem
fallacious; and that the foregoing arguments cannot have great force, but with those
who are well acquainted with these writers, and know the truth of the general position.
For instance, what absurdity would it be to assert, that Virgil understood not the force
of the terms he employs, and could not chuse his epithets with propriety? Because in
the following lines, addressed also to Augustus, he has failed in that particular, and
has ascribed to the Indians a quality, which seems, in a manner, to turn his hero into
ridicule.
——— Et te, maxime Cæsar,
Qui nunc extremis Asiæ jam victor in oris
Imbellem avertis Romanis arcibus Indum.
Georg. Lib. 2, 171.
[1. ]Memoires de Marquis d’Argens.
[1. ]Those concluded by the peace of the Pyrenees, Nimeguen, Ryswick, and Aix-laChapelle.
[2. ]That concluded by the peace of Utrecht.
[1. ]To this purpose see also Essay I. at the end. [The reference is to “Of Commerce,”
where Hume argues that the harsher climate of the temperate zone, as contrasted to
the torrid zone, has been a great spur to industry and invention.]
[1. ]Melon, Du Tot, Law, in the pamphlets published in France.
[1. ]What is the advantage of the column after it has broke the enemy’s line? only,
that it then takes them in flank, and dissipates whatever stands near it by a fire from
all sides. But till it has broke them, does it not present a flank to the enemy, and that
exposed to their musquetry, and, what is much worse, to their cannon?
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 488 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704
[1. ]Strabo, lib. iv. 200, says, that one legion would be sufficient, with a few cavalry;
but the Romans commonly kept up somewhat a greater force in this island, which
they never took the pains entirely to subdue.
[2. ]It appears that Cromwell’s parliament, in 1656, settled but 1,300,000 pounds a
year on him for the constant charges of government in all the three kingdoms. See
Scobel, chap. 31. This was to supply the fleet, army, and civil list. It appears from
Whitelocke, that in the year 1649, the sum of 80,000 pounds a month was the estimate
for 40,000 men. We must conclude, therefore, that Cromwell had much less than that
number upon pay in 1656. In the very instrument of government, 20,000 foot and
10,000 horse are fixed by Cromwell himself, and afterwards confirmed by the
parliament, as the regular standing army of the commonwealth. That number, indeed,
seems not to have been much exceeded during the whole time of the protectorship.
See farther Thurlo, Vol. II. pp. 413, 499, 568. We may there see, that though the
Protector had more considerable armies in Ireland and Scotland, he had not
sometimes more than 4,000 or 5,000 men in England.
[1. ]Editions H and I read: The most judicious of historians.
[1. ]Editions O and P append the note: This was published in 1752.
Online Library of Liberty: Essays Moral, Political, Literary (LF ed.)
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 489 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/704