Alciphron
or: The Minute Philosopher
A Defence of the Christian Religion against the So-called Free-thinkers
George Berkeley

Contents
First Dialogue: Free-thinking and the general good 2
Second dialogue: The ethics of Mandeville 23
Third dialogue: The ethics of Shaftesbury) 36
Fourth dialogue: The truth of theism 51
Fifth dialogue: The utility of Christianity 70
Sixth dialogue: The truth of Christianity 88
Alciphron George Berkeley
Seventh dialogue: The truth of Christianity 113
Alciphron George Berkeley
I want to consider the various things that a free-thinker can
be—atheist, libertine, fanatic, scorner, critic, metaphysician,
fatalist, sceptic—but you shouldn’t think that ·according to
me· every individual free-thinker is all of these. All I am
saying is that each item on that list characterizes some freethinkers.
You may think that no free-thinker is an atheist. It
has often been said that although there are admittedly some
atheists who claim to be philosophical theorists, no-one is
really an atheist as a matter of philosophical theory. I know
these things are said; but I am well assured that one of
the most noted writers against Christianity in our times
claims to have discovered a demonstration [= ‘knock-down
proof’] that there is no God. If you take the trouble to
consult conversation and books to inform yourself about
the principles and tenets of our modern free-thinkers, I’m
sure you’ll find that every item on my list is true to life.
I am not writing only against books. Don’t think that
the free-thinking authors are being misrepresented if every
notion of Alciphron or Lysicles is not found precisely in what
the authors have written. We can expect that a man in
a private conversation will speak more openly than others
write, to •improve on the hints given by authors of books,
and •draw conclusions from their principles.
Whatever they may claim, I believe that all those who
write either explicitly or by insinuation against the dignity,
freedom, and immortality of the human soul can on that
account be fairly accused of unsettling the principles of
morality and destroying the means of making men rationally
virtuous. We can expect from that direction a lot that is
harmful to the interests of virtue. A certain admired writer
has expressed the view that •the cause of virtue is likely to
suffer less from •those who mock it than from •those who
tenderly nurse it, because the nurses are apt to bundle it
up too warmly and kill it with excess of care and cherishing,
and also make it a mercenary thing by talking so much of its
rewards.
I leave it to you to decide whether this is a fair statement
of the situation.
[The Dialogues are reported in a long letter written to a friend by a
fictional gentleman named Dion—all the names are Greek. His opening
words echo Berkeley’s situation when composing this work: he was in
Rhode Island, facing the probable failure of his plan to start a college in
Bermuda. The Dialogues, however, are located in a quietly rural part of
England.]
1
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
First Dialogue (Monday)
1. I was optimistic enough to believe that by now I’d
have been able to send you an agreeable account of the
success of the plan that brought me to this remote corner
of the country. But all I could report are the details of
how it went wrong; and I prefer instead to entertain you
with some amusing incidents that have helped to soothe me
during the inevitable and unforeseeable difficulties that I
have encountered. Events are not in our power; but we can
always make good use even of the worst. And I have to admit
that the way this affair went, and the outcome of it, gave
me an opportunity for reflections that help to compensate
for my great loss of time and my trouble and expense. . . . A
mind that is free to reflect on its own processes, if it doesn’t
produce anything useful to the world, usually manages to
entertain itself. For the past several months I have enjoyed
that kind of freedom and leisure in this distant place, far
from that great whirlpool of business, struggle, and pleasure
that is called the world. And my enjoyment of this peaceful
place has been greatly increased by the conversation and
good qualities of my host, Euphranor—he’s a philosopher
and a farmer, two roles that are not so inconsistent in nature
as you might think.
From the time he left the university, Euphranor has
lived in this small town where he has a good house with a
hundred acres of land adjoining it; after the work he has put
into improving the land, it provides him with a comfortable
income. He has a good collection of books, mainly old ones
left to him by a clergyman uncle who brought him up. And
the business of his farm doesn’t hinder him from making
good use of it. He has read much, and thought more; his
health and strength of body helping him not to become
mentally weary. He thinks he can carry on his studies better
in the field than in his study, and his mind is seldom idle
while he prunes the trees, follows the plough, or looks after
his flocks.
In the house of this honest friend I became acquainted
with a wealthy and distinguished friend of Euphranor’s
named Crito. His (·Anglican·) parish church is in our
town. One Sunday last summer when he was dining at
Euphranor’s, I asked after his guests, whom we had seen at
church with him the previous Sunday. ‘They are both well,’
said Crito, ‘but having dropped in at the church that one
time, just to see what sort of congregation our parish could
provide, they had no further curiosity about the church, and
so chose to stay at home.’ ‘What!’ said Euphranor, ‘are they
Presbyterians?’ ‘No,’ replied Crito, ‘they are free-thinkers.’
Euphranor, who had never met any member of that species
or sect of men, and knew little of their writings, wanted to
know what their principles were, what system they accepted.
‘That is more than I can tell you’, said Crito. ‘Their writers
have different opinions. Some go further, and state their
position more openly than others. But the best way to learn
about the current ideas of the sect is to talk with those who
declare themselves to be free-thinkers. Your curiosity could
now be satisfied if you and Dion would spend a week at my
house with these guests of mine, who seem very ready to
declare and propagate their opinions. Alciphron is in his
forties, and is no stranger to men or to books. I knew him
first when we were both training as lawyers in London. When
he came into a rich inheritance, he gave up his law studies
and travelled through the civilized parts of Europe. After
his return he lived among the amusements of London, but
2
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
he began to find them stale and insipid, which threw him
into a sort of irritable laziness. My other guest, Lysicles
[pronounced Lie-suh-clees], is a near relative of mine. He is
a quick and clever young gentleman, with some general
knowledge about bookish matters. After he had completed
his formal education and seen a little of the world, he became
friends with men of pleasure and free-thinkers [Berkeley’s exact
phrase], which I fear has greatly harmed his health and his
fortune. But what I regret most is the corruption of his
mind by a set of harmful principles that he won’t ever be
cured of. They have survived the passions of youth, so
there’s no chance of his losing them now. These two would
be agreeable enough if only they didn’t fancy themselves
free-thinkers. Because of this, frankly speaking, they make
it a little too obvious that they think themselves wiser than
the rest of the world. I would like it if my guests met
with their match where they least expected it, in a country
farmer!’ Euphranor replied: ‘I’m not offering to do more than
merely inform myself about their principles and opinions. So
tomorrow I’ll assign my workers their work for a week, and
accept your invitation, if Dion is willing.’ I gave my consent.
‘Meanwhile,’ said Crito, ‘I’ll prepare my guests, telling them
that an honest neighbour would like to talk with them about
their free-thinking. I’ll be surprised if they don’t like the
prospect of leaving a convert behind them, even in a country
village!’
Next morning Euphranor rose early and spent the morning
putting his affairs in order. After lunch we took our walk
to Crito’s, which lay through half a dozen pleasant fields. . . .
After walking for about an hour we came to Crito’s house,
which stands in the middle of a beautiful little park. . . . At
the door we met a servant carrying a small basket of fruit to
a grove, where he said his master was with his two guests.
We found the three of them sitting in the shade. And after
the usual preliminaries for people meeting for the first time,
Euphranor and I sat down by them.
We chatted about the beauty of this rural scene, the fine
season of the year, and some improvements—new methods
of agriculture—that had been introduced recently in the
adjacent county. This gave Alciphron an opening to remark
that the most valuable improvements came latest. ‘I wouldn’t
be much tempted’, he said, ‘to live in a place where men don’t
have polished manners or cultivated minds, however greatly
its land has been improved. I realised long ago that there is a
gradual progress in human affairs. The first care of mankind
is to (1) satisfy the cravings of nature; next they (2) attend
to the conveniences and comforts of life. But (3) subduing
prejudices and acquiring true knowledge—that Herculean
labour!—comes last, because it requires the most perfect
abilities and all other advantages prepare the way for it.’
‘Right!’ said Euphranor, ‘Alciphron has mentioned our true
defect. It has always been thought that as soon as we had (1)
provided subsistence for the body our next concern should
be to (3) improve the mind. But (2) the desire for wealth
steps between, and occupies men’s thoughts.’
2. Alciphron: We’re told that thought is what distinguishes
man from beast; ·to which I add that· freedom of
thought makes just as much difference between man and
man. It’s the noble upholders of this privilege and perfection
of human kind—the free-thinkers I mean, who have sprung
up and multiplied in recent years—to whom we are indebted
for all those important discoveries, that ocean of light, that
has broken in and poured through in spite of slavery and
superstition.
Euphranor, who is a sincere enemy to both slavery and
superstition, expressed his admiration for the good people
who had saved their country from being ruined by them,
having spread so much light and knowledge over the land. He
3
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
added that he liked the name ‘free-thinker’ and approved of
people’s being free thinkers; but in his sense of the term every
honest inquirer after truth in any age or country was entitled
to it. So what about this sect that according to Alciphron had
recently ‘sprung up?’ What were their tenets? Euphranor
wanted to know. What were their discoveries—the ones
through which they brought benefits to mankind? He would
be grateful if Alciphron would inform him about all this.
‘That will be no trouble’, replied Alciphron, ‘because I
myself am one of them, and some of the most considerable
free-thinkers are close friends of mine.’ And seeing
that Euphranor was listening respectfully, he went on very
fluently: ‘The mind of man is like a piece of land. What
uprooting, ploughing, digging, and harrowing is to the land
is what thinking, reflecting and examining is to the human
mind. There’s a right way to cultivate each. Land that is
allowed to stay waste and wild for a long time will be choked
with brush-wood, brambles, thorns, and other plants that
are neither useful nor beautiful. Similarly, in a neglected
uncultivated mind many prejudices and absurd opinions
will sprout up, owing their origin partly to the •soil itself
(the passions and imperfections of the mind of man) and
partly to •seeds that happen to have been scattered there by
every wind of doctrine that is raised up by the cunning of
politicians, the eccentricities of pedants, the superstition of
fools, or the dishonesty of priests. What can we expect the
human mind to be like today, after so many ages of being
vulnerable to the frauds of dishonest men and the follies
of weak ones? Its prejudices and errors—what strong deep
roots they must have! What a hard job it will be to tear them
out! But this difficult glorious work is what the modern
free-thinkers are undertaking.’ Alciphron paused and looked
around his listeners.
‘Indeed,’ I said, ‘a very praiseworthy undertaking!’
‘People generally think’, said Euphranor, ‘that it is praiseworthy
to clear and subdue the earth, to tame brute animals,.
. . .to provide nourishment for men’s bodies, and cure
their illnesses. But what is all this in comparison to the most
excellent and useful undertaking of freeing mankind from
their errors, and improving and adorning their minds?’. . . .
‘These days’, replied Alciphron, ‘people are fools enough
not to be able to tell their best benefactors from their worst
enemies. They have a blind respect for those who enslave
them, and regard their deliverers as dangerous men who
want to undermine accepted principles and opinions.’
Euphranor: It would be a pity if such worthy and able men
were to meet with any discouragement. It seems to me that a
man who spends his time in such a laborious, impartial
search for truth is a better friend to mankind than the
greatest statesman or hero. The good that they do is confined
to a small part of the world and a short period of time,
whereas a ray of truth can enlighten the whole world and
carry on into future ages.
Alciphron: I’m afraid the common herd won’t soon come to
think like you about this. But the better sort, educated
men with good abilities, are properly respectful of those who
support light and truth.
Euphranor: No doubt the clergy are always ready to help and
applaud your worthy endeavours.
Upon hearing this Lysicles could hardly stifle his laughter,
and Alciphron, with an air of pity, told Euphranor: ‘I see
that you don’t know what these men are really like. Surely
you must realise that of all men living the clergy are our
greatest enemies. They would (if they could) extinguish the
light of nature itself, turn the world into a dungeon, and
keep mankind for ever in chains and darkness.’
4
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
Euphranor: I never imagined anything like this of our Protestant
clergy, particularly the Anglican ones, whom I would
have expected—going by what I have seen of them and their
writings—to be lovers of learning and useful knowledge.
Alciphron: Believe me, priests of all religions are the same:
where there are priests there will be priestcraft; and where
there is priestcraft there will be a persecuting spirit. You
can depend on them to exercise their full persecutory power
against anyone who •has the courage to think for himself
and who •refuses to be hoodwinked and shackled by his
reverend leaders. Those great masters of hair-splitting and
jargon have fabricated various systems—which [this is added
sarcastically] are all equally true and equally important for the
world. Everyone is wedded to his own sect, and furiously
attacks all those who disagree with it. [The next sentence speaks
of ‘the magistrate’, a term that will occur several more times in these
dialogues. It is a kind of short-hand for ‘judges and anyone else who is
involved in the enforcement of the law of the land’. Sometimes, as on
page 8, it seems to cover also law-makers.] The chief vices of priests
and churchmen all over the world are cruelty and ambition,
so they do their best to get the upper hand over the rest of
mankind; and the magistrate—having a joint interest with
the priest in subduing, confusing and scaring the people—too
often lends a hand to the church authorities, who always
think that their authority and possessions aren’t safe until
those whose opinions are different from their own are deprived
of their rights, including the rights belonging to their
social status and even their rights as human beings. Picture
to yourselves a monster or ghost made up of superstition
and fanaticism, the offspring of statecraft and priestcraft,
rattling chains in one hand, and with the other brandishing
a flaming sword over the land and threatening destruction
to all who dare to follow the dictates of reason and common
sense. Just think about this, and then say if our undertaking
isn’t dangerous as well as difficult! And yet, because of
the noble ardour that truth inspires, our free-thinkers are
neither overcome by the difficulty nor daunted by the danger.
In spite of both, we have already made so many converts
among people of the better sort. . . .that we hope to be able
·eventually· to carry all before us, beat down the walls of
secular and ecclesiastical tyranny, break the fetters and
chains of our countrymen, and restore the original inherent
rights, liberties, and privileges of mankind.
Having said all this in a highly emotional way, Alciphron
paused to get his breath back. But nobody answered him
(Euphranor was staring at him, mouth open); so Alciphron
went on. Turning to Euphranor, he spoke less excitedly: ‘The
more innocent and honest a man is, the more vulnerable he
is to being taken in by the plausible claims of other men. You
have probably encountered writings by our theologians that
discuss grace, virtue, goodness, and such matters—writings
that are fit to confuse and deceive a simple, honest mind.
But however much they may whitewash their designs, they
are all basically engaged in the same selfish project. I don’t
deny that ·among •the theologians· there may be here and
there a poor half-witted man who means no harm; but
I don’t hesitate to say that all the men of sense among
•them are fundamentally driven by ambition, avarice, and
vengefulness.’
4. While Alciphron was speaking, a servant came to tell
him and Lysicles that some men who were about to set off
for London were waiting to receive their orders. So they
both got up and went towards the house. As soon as they
were gone, Euphranor remarked to Crito that he thought
the poor gentleman must have been made to suffer greatly
because of his free-thinking, because he seemed to speak
with the passion and resentment natural to men who have
been treated very badly.
5
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
‘I don’t believe it’, answered Crito. ‘In members of his
sect—·i.e. free-thinkers·—I have often noticed two conversational
faults, namely •high-flown rhetoric and •teasing,
depending on whether their mood of the moment is tragic or
comic. Sometimes they work themselves into high passions
and are then frightened by the ghosts they have created.
When they are having one of those fits, every assistant
parson of a little country church is seen as an inquisitor. At
other times they adopt a sly joking manner, using hints and
allusions, saying little but insinuating much, and over-all
seeming to amuse themselves at the expense of the subject
and of their adversaries. If you want to know what they
really believe, you’ll have to get them to speak up and not
to ramble off the topic. They tend to go on about being
persecuted for free-thinking; but they have no good reason
for this, because everyone is perfectly free to think what
he pleases; I don’t know of any persecution in England for
opinion, intellectual attitude, or thought. But I suppose that
in every country some •care is taken to restrain obscene
speech, and to discourage an outward contempt for what the
public holds sacred, whatever the person’s inward thoughts
may be. Whether this •care in England has recently become
so excessive as to distress the subjects of this formerly free
and easy government, whether the free-thinkers can fairly
complain of any hardship suffered because of conscience or
opinion, you’ll be better placed to judge when you hear their
account of the numbers, progress, and notions of their sect.
I’m sure they will tell you all this fully and freely, provided
nobody present seems shocked or offended, for in that case
they may tone things down out of sheer good manners.’
‘I am never angry with any man for his opinion’, said
Euphranor. ‘Whether he’s a Jew, Turk, or idol-worshipper,
he can speak his mind freely to me without fear of offending.
I would even be glad to hear what he has to say, provided
he says it in an honest open manner. Whoever digs in the
mine of truth is my fellow-labourer, I think; but if while I am
trying hard he amuses himself by teasing me and flinging
dust in my eyes, I’ll soon be tired of him.
5. In the meantime, Alciphron and Lysicles, having
settled their bit of business, returned to us. Lysicles sat
down in the same place as before. But Alciphron stood in
front of us, with his arms folded and his head leaning on
his left shoulder in the posture of a man meditating. We sat
silent, so as not to disturb his thoughts, and after two or
three minutes he said ‘Oh truth! Oh liberty!’ After which he
went on musing.
At this point Euphranor ventured to interrupt him.
‘Alciphron’, he said, ‘it isn’t fair to spend your time in
silent soliloquies. In this corner of the world we don’t
often get a chance to have a conversation with learned and
well-informed men, and the opportunity you have put into
my hands is too valuable for me not to make the best use of
it.’
Alciphron: Are you, then, a sincere devotee of truth? And
can you stand the freedom of a fair inquiry?
Euphranor: That’s what I want more than anything.
Alciphron: What? on every subject? On the notions that
you first took in with your mother’s milk, and that have ever
since been fed to you by other ‘nurses’—parents, pastors,
tutors, religious assemblies, books of devotion, and other
such devices for taking hold of men’s minds?
Euphranor: I love information on all subjects that come my
way, and especially on those that are most important.
Alciphron: Well, then, if you are in earnest, stay fair and
stand firm while I probe your prejudices and wipe out your
principles—‘while I pull from your heart your hoary old wives’
tales’ [he says this in Latin, quoting the poet Persius]. Whereupon
6
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
Alciphron frowned, paused, and then launched forth: ‘If we
take the trouble to dig down to the bottom of things, and
analyse the basic principles on which opinions rest, we’ll find
that the opinions that are thought to be the most important
have the flimsiest bases, being derived either from the casual
customs of the country where we live, or from indoctrination
that we were subjected to before we could tell right from
wrong, true from false. [Alciphron is about the speak of the ‘vulgar’,
and to say what he means by that word. Broadly speaking, its sense
at that time was ‘common, ordinary, run-of-the-mill, not very educated,
not possessed of serious intellectual interests’—something along those
lines; it didn’t have the sense of ‘rude, crude, bad-mannered’ or the like.
In the present work, ‘vulgar’ is sometimes used as a term of disdain or
condescension to refer to people who wouldn’t have counted as ‘vulgar’ is
the sober, strictly literal sense of the word.] The vulgar—meaning all
the people who don’t make a free use of their reason—tend
to regard these prejudices as sacred and unquestionable,
believing them to be •imprinted on the hearts of men by
God himself, or •conveyed by revelation from heaven, or •so
intrinsically clear and evident that one can’t help accepting
them without any inquiry or examination. In this way the
shallow vulgar have their heads full of fancies, principles
and doctrines—religious, moral and political—all of which
they maintain with a level of energy that is proportional to
their lack of reason! On the other hand, those who properly
used their faculties in the search for truth are especially
careful to weed out of their minds any notions or prejudices
that were planted in them before they were old enough to
use reason freely and completely. Our modern free-thinkers
have actually done this: as well as shrewdly dissecting the
generally accepted systems ·of belief·, they have traced every
established prejudice to its source—the real reasons why
people believe what they believe. And in the course of doing
this—and getting a comprehensive overview of the various
parts and ages of the world—they have been able to observe
an amazing variety of •customs and rites, of •religious and
civil institutions, of •ideas and beliefs that are very unlike
(and even contrary to) one another, which conclusively shows
that they can’t all be true. Yet each of them is maintained
by its supporters with the same air of confidence, the same
energetic earnestness, and when they are examined they
all turn out to have the very same foundation—namely, the
strength of prejudice! With the help of these observations
and discoveries, they have broken the chains of popular
custom, and, having freed themselves from fraud, they now
generously lend a hand to their fellow-subjects, to lead them
into the same paths of light and liberty.
‘That is a quick summary of the views and projects of
the so-called free-thinkers. If anything that I have said
or anything I’ll say later is contrary to your preconceived
opinions, and therefore shocking and disagreeable to you,
you’ll pardon the openness and plainness of a philosopher,
and remember that whenever I displease you in that way
I am doing it out of •respect for the truth, and •obedience
to your own commands. I’m well aware that eyes long kept
in the dark can’t bear a sudden view of noonday light, and
must be brought to it by degrees. For that reason, the able
free-thinkers proceed gradually, starting with the prejudices
to which men are least attached, and then moving on to
undermine the rest by slow and imperceptible degrees, till
they have demolished the whole fabric of human folly and
superstition. But I don’t have time here to come at things
in that roundabout way; I’ll have to proceed directly and
plainly—more so, perhaps, than will be thought prudent and
well-mannered.’
We assured him he was entirely free to speak his mind
concerning things, persons and opinions, without holding
anything back.
7
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
‘That is a freedom’, Alciphron replied, ‘that we freethinkers
are as willing to give as we are to take it. We
like to call things by their right names, and we can’t bear
having truth suffer because people politely let falsehoods
pass without challenge. So let us settle this in advance:
no-one will take offence at anything whatsoever that is said
on either side.’ We agreed to this.
6. ‘Well, then,’ said Alciphron, ‘let us start our pursuit of
the truth by supposing that I have been brought up in—let’s
say—the Church of England, ·the Anglican church·. When I
reach maturity of judgment, and think about the particular
forms of worship and opinions of this Church, I don’t remember
when or how they first took possession of my mind; as
I look back, I find them to have been in my mind for as far
back as my memory of anything stretches. Then, looking at
the upbringing of children as a basis for a judgment about
how my own upbringing went, I see them being instructed in
religious matters before they can reason about them; so that
all such instruction is nothing but filling the tender mind
of a child with prejudices. This leads me to reject all those
religious ideas, regarding them as on a par with the other
follies of my childhood. I am confirmed in this attitude when
I widen my view and see Roman Catholics and various sects
of Protestants which all agree in a general profession of belief
in Christ, but differ vastly one from another regarding details
of faith and worship. Then I widen my view still further so
as to take in Jews and Moslems: I see that they agree a little
with Christians—in that they all believe in one God—but each
of these religions has its own special laws and revelations,
for which it expresses the same respect as the others have
for their laws and revelations. Looking further afield still,
to examine heathen and idolatrous nations, I discover an
endless variety, not only in •details of doctrine and •forms of
worship, but even in •the very notion of a God, in which they
differ widely from one another and from all the other sects I
have mentioned. The bottom line is that instead of simple
and uniform truth, I see nothing but discord, opposition,
and wild claims, all springing up from the prejudices of
upbringing. From reflecting on and thinking about these
facts, thoughtful men have concluded that all religions are
false—are fables. The reason why one man is a Christian,
another a Jew, a third a Moslem, a fourth a heathen idolater
is that each happened to be brought up in that particular
sect. So: just as each of these contending parties condemns
the rest, so an unprejudiced bystander will condemn and
reject them en bloc, seeing that they all originate from the
•same error-rich source, and are kept going by •the same
techniques, to meet the •same purposes of the priest and the
magistrate [see note on page 5].
7. Euphranor: So you think that the magistrate goes
along with the priest in misleading the people?
Alciphron: I do; and so must everyone who considers things
in a true light. For you must know that the magistrate’s main
aim is to keep the people under him in awe. Now, the public
eye restrains men from •open offences against the laws and
government. But, to prevent •secret crimes, a magistrate
finds it expedient that men should believe that God’s eye
is watching over their private actions and designs. And to
intimidate those who might otherwise be drawn into crimes
by the prospect of pleasure and profit, he tells them that
whoever escapes punishment in this life will be sure to find
it in the after-life—where it will be so heavy and long-lasting
that it infinitely outweighs any pleasure or profit that he got
from his crimes. So it has come about that the beliefs that
•there is a God,
•the soul is immortal, and
•there is a future state of rewards and punishments
8
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
have been valued as useful engines of government. These
are rather notional airy doctrines, and the rulers need them
to impress themselves on people’s senses, and to be retained
in their minds; and so the rulers of the various civilized
nations of the earth have skillfully devised temples, sacrifices,
churches, rites, ceremonies, clerical clothing, music, prayer,
preaching, and other such ‘spiritual’ foolery, all of which
helps the priest to prosper in his career, and satisfies the
magistrate by frightening and subduing the people. That’s
the source of
•the alliance between Church and State,
•religion established by law, and
•the rights, immunities and incomes of priests all over
the world.
Every government wants you to fear God, so that you’ll
honour the king or civil power. . . .’
Crito and I heard this speech of Alciphron’s with the
utmost attention but without looking surprised—and indeed
for us there was nothing new or unexpected in it. But
Euphranor, who had never before been present at such
conversation, couldn’t help showing some astonishment;
and Lysicles, who noticed it, asked him brightly how he liked
Alciphron’s lecture. ‘I think it’s the first you ever heard of
that kind,’ he said, ‘and you’ll have needed a strong stomach
to digest it.’
Euphranor: I admit that I don’t have the quickest digestion;
but it has sometimes gradually been able to assimilate things
that at first seemed indigestible. Right now, I admire Alciphron’s
free spirit and eloquence; but frankly I’m astonished
by his opinions rather than convinced of their truth. What!
(he said, turning to Alciphron)—can you really not believe in
the existence of a God?
Alciphron: To be plain with you, I do not.
8. But this is what I thought would happen: a flood of
light let in on the mind all at once is more likely to dazzle
and disorder the mind than to enlighten it. If I weren’t short
of time, I would have begun in the regular way:
•first describing the features of religion that aren’t
essential to it;
•then attacking the mysteries of Christianity;
•after that proceeding to what Christianity teaches
about conduct; and
•finally wiping out the belief in a God,
this last being the first taught of all the religious prejudices,
and the basis of the rest, so that it has taken the deepest
root in our minds. I’m not surprised that you still have this
belief, this prejudice, because I have known a number of
very able men who had trouble freeing themselves from it.
Euphranor: Not everyone has the same speed and energy of
thinking as you do. I, for one, find it hard to keep up with
you.
Alciphron: To help you, I’ll go back a little, and pick up
the thread of my reasoning. (1) First, I must tell you that
having thought hard about the idea of truth, I have found
truth to be stable, permanent, and uniform—not various and
changeable, like modes or fashions, or matters of taste. (2)
In the next place, having observed many sects and splinters
from sects adopting very different and contrary opinions
while all professing Christianity, I rejected any doctrine on
which they didn’t all agree, and kept only the one that was
agreed to by all; and so I became a Latitudinarian [= roughly:
‘someone who is a “Christian” in a broad sense, with no interest in the
details of doctrine, church government, forms of worship etc. that divide
branches of Christianity from one another’]. (3) After going on to
attend to more of the facts, I saw that Christians, Jews,
and Moslems have their different systems of faith, agreeing
9
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
only in the belief that there is one God; and so I became
a Deist [= roughly: ‘someone who rejects miracles, revelation, anything
supernatural, and has no interest in any organized church or form of
worship, but believes that natural evidence points to there being a God’].
(4) Lastly, I extended my view to all the many nations that
inhabit this globe, and found that they didn’t agree—with
one another or with any of the sects I have mentioned—on
any point of faith, not even on the notion of a God. . . . So I
became an atheist; because I think that a man of courage
and good sense should follow his argument wherever it
leads him, and that nothing is more ridiculous than to be a
free-thinker by halves! I approve of the man who does the job
thoroughly—not merely lopping off the branches but pulling
up the root from which they grew.
[Regarding this next bit: (1) The ‘grand arcanum’ was the mythical
‘philosopher’s stone’, which was reputed to •transform lead into gold
and/or perform other wonders. Alciphron’s ironical use of the term may
be meant to indicate that atheism •transforms large parts of one’s beliefsystem.
(2) In Berkeley’s day, calling someone ‘a genius’ was stronger
than merely calling him clever, but had less force than ‘genius’ does in
our day.]
9. So you see that atheism—which frightens women
and fools—is the very peak and perfection of free-thinking.
It is the grand arcanum to which a true genius naturally
rises—perhaps gradually, perhaps as a sudden intellectual
break-through—and without it he can never have absolute
freedom and peace in his soul. To become thoroughly
convinced about this central point, just examine the notion
of a God with the same freedom that you would examine
any other prejudice. Track it back to its source, and you
won’t find that you acquired it through any of your senses,
though these are in fact the only true means of discovering
what is real and substantial in nature. You’ll find it lying
among other old lumber in some obscure corner of your
imagination, the proper dumping-ground for visions, fancies,
and prejudices of all kinds; and if you are more attached
to this ·bit of lumber· than you are to the rest, that’s only
because it is the oldest. That is all. Take my word for it,
and not just mine but that of many of the ablest men of
our times, whose views about God are the same as mine.
They really are, though some of these people think they
should go more gently in declaring to the world their opinion
on this matter than on most others. And I have to admit
that in England there are still too many people who retain
a foolish prejudice against the label ‘atheist’. But that is
lessening every day among people of the better sort; and
when it—i.e. the prejudice against the word ‘atheist’—has
faded to nothing, our free-thinkers can then, at last, be
said to have given the death-blow to religion; because it’s
obvious that so long as people think that God exists, religion
must survive in some shape or other. But once the root
has been plucked up, all its offspring will wither and decay
as a matter of course. The ‘offspring’ I’m talking about are
all those whimsical notions of conscience, duty, principle,
and the like, which fill a man’s head with worries, awe him
with fears, and make him more thoroughly a slave than
is the horse he rides. It’s a thousand times better to be
•hunted by debt-collectors or bailiffs with subpoenas than
to be •haunted by these spectres ·of conscience etc.·, which
trouble and embitter all his pleasures, creating the most real
and severe slavery on earth. But the free-thinker, with a
vigorous flight of thought, breaks through those airy traps
and asserts his basic independence. Others may talk and
write and fight about liberty, and outwardly claim to have it;
but only the free-thinker is truly free.
When Alciphron ended this speech with an air of triumph,
Euphranor said to him: ‘You make clear work. It seems that
10
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
the gentlemen who believe as you do are admirable weeders.
You have rooted up a world of notions; now show me what
fine things you have planted in place of them.’
Alciphron: Be patient, Euphranor! I’ll show you first •that we
leave untouched whatever was sound and good, encouraging
it to grow in the mind of man. And secondly I’ll show you
•what excellent things we have planted there. Pushing on
with our close and severe scrutiny, we eventually arrive
at something solid and real on which all mankind agree—
namely, the appetites, passions, and senses. These are
rooted in nature, are real, have real objects, and bring with
them real and substantial pleasures—food, drink, sleep, and
other such animal enjoyments being what all men like and
love. And if we extend our view to the other kinds of animals,
we’ll find that they all have certain natural appetites and
senses, which they are constantly engaged in gratifying and
satisfying. We are so far from •destroying these real natural
good things, which have nothing notional or fanciful about
them, that we do our best to •cherish and improve them.
According to us, every wise man regards himself—i.e. his
own bodily existence in this present world—as the centre
and ultimate end of all his actions and concerns. He regards
his appetites as natural guides that will direct him to his
proper good, and regards his passions and senses as the
natural true means of enjoying this good. So he tries to keep
his appetites alert, and •his passions and senses strong and
lively, and works very hard in every possible way to provide
the greatest quantity and variety of real objects suited to
•them. A man who can do this without restraint, remorse, or
fear is as happy as any other animal whatsoever—as happy
as his nature is capable of being. There! I have given you a
condensed view of the principles, discoveries, and beliefs of
the select spirits [here = ‘the best minds’] of this enlightened age.
10. [After a polite little to-and-fro about the need for
open frankness on both sides, the discussion continues:]
‘I am half ashamed’, said Euphranor, to admit that I have
a weakness that lesser minds are prone to (I’m no great
genius!). I have favourite opinions that you represent as
errors and prejudices. For instance, the immortality of the
soul is a notion I’m fond of because it supports the mind
with a very pleasing prospect. If it is wrong, I might side with
Cicero, who said that in that case he would be sorry to know
the truth, and, speaking of certain philosophers of his time
who taught that the human soul was mortal, said that he had
nothing to thank them for. Those philosophers seem to have
been predecessors of those who are now called free-thinkers.
[Euphranor goes on to remark that ‘free-thinker’ is too
general a name, and that he has no objection to thinking
freely. He proposes that the ‘sect’ be given the name that
Cicero gave them.]
Alciphron: With all my heart. What name is it?
Euphranor: Why, he calls them ‘minute philosophers’. [This
is ‘minute’ = ‘small’, not = ‘60 seconds’. Euphranor’s point is of course
not that these philosophers are small, but that they represent valuable
things as small or of small importance. Alciphron will soon suggest a
different meaning for the label.]
‘Right!’ said Crito, ‘the modern free-thinkers are just like
the ones that Cicero called “minute philosophers”. It’s an
excellent name for them, because they diminish all the most
valuable things—the thoughts, views, and hopes of men.
They •reduce all the knowledge, ideas, and theories that men
have to sense; they •shrink and downgrade human nature
to the narrow low standard of animal life; and •they assign
to us only a small pittance of time instead of immortality.’
Alciphron very gravely remarked that the gentlemen of
his sect had not insulted man, and that if man is a little,
11
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
short-lived, negligible animal, it wasn’t their saying it that
made him so; and they were no more to blame for whatever
defects they reveal in themselves than a good mirror is to
blame for making the wrinkles that it shows. ‘As for your
remark that those we now call “free-thinkers” were in ancient
times called “minute philosophers”, I suggest that this label
may have come from their considering things minutely rather
than swallowing them in great lumps as other men usually
do. Anyway, we all know that the best eyes are necessary
to pick out the minutest objects: so it seems that minute
philosophers might have been so-called because they were
so sharp-sighted.’
Euphranor: O Alciphron! These minute philosophers (that
is the right name for them) are like pirates who plunder
everything that comes in their way. I feel like a man who has
been left stripped and desolate on a bleak beach.
11. But who are these profound and learned men that in
recent years have demolished the whole fabric that lawgivers,
philosophers, and theologians had been erecting for so many
ages?
Lysicles, smiling, said he believed Euphranor was imagining
philosophers in square caps and long gowns, and that
in these happy times the reign of pedantry was over. ‘•Our
philosophers’, he said, ‘are very different from the awkward
students who try to get knowledge by poring over dead
languages and ancient authors, or by shutting themselves
off from the cares of the world to meditate in solitude. •They
are the best bred men of the age, men who know the world,
men of pleasure, men of fashion, and fine gentlemen.’
Euphranor: I have some idea of the people you’re talking
about, but I would never have taken them for philosophers.
Crito: Nor would anyone else until quite recently. It seems
that for centuries everyone mistakenly thought that the way
to knowledge was through a tedious course of academic
education and study. But one of the chief discoveries of the
present time is that such a method slows down and blocks
knowledge rather than promoting it. [Crito is of course speaking
sarcastically; he doesn’t actually side with the minute philosophers. He
will keep up this tone until page 15, where he will come into the open.
His open attacks on the minute philosophy in the second dialogue are the
most rhetorically vivid and passionate things that Berkeley ever wrote.]
Alciphron: There are two strands in academic study—
•reading and •thinking. What the students mainly •read
are ancient authors in dead languages, so that much of
their time is spent in learning words which, once they’ve
been laboriously mastered, reward the scholar with old and
obsolete ideas that are now quite exploded and abandoned.
As for their •thinking: what good can possibly come of it? If
someone doesn’t have the right materials to think about, he
can think and meditate for ever without getting anywhere.
Those cobwebs that scholars spin out of their own brains
are neither useful nor beautiful. There’s only one way to get
proper ideas, or materials of thought, and that is by keeping
good company. I know several gentlemen who, since their
appearance in the world [= ‘the non-academic world’ or perhaps
more narrowly ‘the world of high society and fashion’], have spent as
much time rubbing off the rust and pedantry of a college
education as they had first spent acquiring it.
Lysicles: I’ll bet that a fourteen-year-old who is brought
up in the modern way will make a better showing, and be
more admired in any drawing-room or assembly of cultivated
people, than a twenty-four-year-old who has set aside long
time for studies at school and college. He’ll say better things
in a better manner, and be more liked by good judges.
Euphranor: Where does he pick up all this improvement?
Crito: Where our solemn ancestors would never have looked
12
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
for it, in a drawing-room, a coffee-house, a tavern, a gambling
den. In fashionable places like these it’s the custom for
cultivated persons to speak freely on all subjects—religious,
moral, or political. So that a young gentleman who spends
much time in them is in a position to hear many instructive
lectures, spiced with wit and teasing and uttered with energy.
Three or four well-delivered sentences from a man of quality
make more of an impression, and convey more knowledge,
than a dozen dry academic lectures.
Euphranor: So there’s no method, no set course of studies,
in those places?
Lysicles: None but an easy free conversation, which takes
up every topic that anyone offers, without any rule or design.
Euphranor: I always thought that to get any useful amount
of knowledge one needed some order in one’s studies; that
haste and confusion create self-satisfied ignorance; that our
advances can’t be secure unless they are gradual, and that
one should start by learning things that might cast a light
on what was to follow.
Alciphron: So long as learning could be obtained only by
that slow formal course of study, few of the better people
knew much of it; but now that learning has grown into a
pastime, our young gentry and nobility unknowingly absorb
it during their other pastimes, and make a considerable
progress.
Euphranor: That’s presumably why there are so many minute
philosophers.
[Crito resumes his sarcastic pretended admiration for the
minute philosophers. Then:]
Euphranor: It would seem, then, that method, exactness,
and hard work are a ·positive· disadvantage.
Here Alciphron, turning to Lysicles, said he could make
the point very clear, if Euphranor had any notion of painting.
Euphranor: I never saw a first-rate picture in my life, but I
have a pretty good collection of prints, and have seen some
good drawings.
Alciphron: So you know the difference between the Dutch
and the Italian manner?
Euphranor: I have some idea of it.
Alciphron: Well, then, compare •a drawing done by the exact
and laborious touches of a Dutch pencil with •a drawing
casually dashed off in the free manner of a great Italian
master. The Dutch piece, which has taken so much trouble
and time, will indeed be exact, but it won’t have the force,
spirit, or grace that appear in the Italian drawing and are
the effects of an easy, free pencil. Apply this example to our
discussion and you’ll get my point.
Euphranor: Tell me, did those great Italian masters •begin
and continue in their art without any choice of method or
subject, and always draw with the same ease and freedom?
Or did they •conform to some method, beginning with simple
and elementary parts—an eye, a nose, a finger—which they
drew with great effort and care, often drawing the same thing
over and over again so as to get it right, and so gradually
acquiring, through patience and hard work through many
years, the free masterly manner you speak of? If the latter is
right, I leave you to apply the example to our discussion, ·so
that you will get my point·!
Alciphron: Dispute the matter if you like. But a man of
many talents is one thing, and a pedant is another. Hard
methodical work may do for some kinds of people. It takes a
long time to ignite wet straw, and when you do you get a vile
smothering flame; whereas spirits blaze out at once.
Euphranor: The minute philosophers have, it seems, better
talents than other men, which qualifies them for a different
education.
13
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
Alciphron: Tell me, Euphranor, what does one man get to
look good in a way that others don’t? What causes him to
be more polished in how he dresses, how he speaks, and
how he moves? Nothing but keeping good company. That
is also how men gradually and unconsciously get a delicate
taste, a refined judgment, a certain polish in thinking and
expressing themselves. It’s not surprising that you folk who
live out in the country aren’t acquainted with the advantage
of elegant conversation, which constantly keeps the mind
awake and active, making use of its abilities and demanding
all its strength and spirit, on a thousand different occasions
and on subjects that never come in the way of a book-worm
in a college any more than a ploughman.
Crito: Hence the lively faculties, quickness of uptake, slyness
of ridicule, and enormous talent of wit and humour, that
distinguish the gentlemen who believe as you do.
Euphranor: It should seem then that your sect is made up of
what you call fine gentlemen.
Lysicles: Not altogether, for we have among us some thoughtful
people whose upbringing was coarser; ·but though they
can’t be called ‘fine gentlemen’ they have made fine contributions
to our cause·. Having observed the behaviour
of apprentices, watermen, porters, and the gatherings of
rabble in the streets, they have arrived at a profound knowledge
of human nature, and made great discoveries about
the sources, springs, and motives of moral actions. [The
phrase ‘moral actions’ standardly meant ‘actions that do or could involve
consciously held reasons or purposes’.] These ·discoveries· have
demolished the accepted systems ·of morality·, and done a
world of good in the city.
We have men of all sorts and professions—plodding
citizens, thriving stock-brokers, skillful men of business,
elegant courtiers, gallant men of the army—but our chief
strength comes from those promising young men who have
the advantage of a modern education. These are the growing
hopes of our sect; through their influence, we expect, the
great things we have in view will be actually accomplished.
Euphranor: I would never have thought your sect was so
considerable.
Alciphron: Many honest folk in England are as much in the
dark about these matters as you are.
12. It would be wrong to infer •what the prevailing opinion
among people of fashion is from •what is said by a legislator
in parliament, a judge on the bench, or a priest in the
pulpit. They all speak according to law, i.e. according to
the reverend prejudices of our forefathers. You should go
into good company, and take note of what able and well-bred
men say, those who are most listened to and most admired,
in public gatherings as well as in private conversations. Only
someone who has these opportunities can know our real
strength, our numbers, and the impression we make on the
world.
Euphranor: By your account there must be many minute
philosophers among the men of rank and fortune.
Alciphron: A good many; and they contribute greatly to the
spreading of our notions. Anyone who knows the world has
to know that fashions always come from above; so the right
way to propagate an opinion is to start at the upper end ·of
society·. Also, the patronage of men of rank and fortune is
an encouragement to our authors.
Euphranor: So you have authors among you?
Lysicles: We do indeed, a number of them; and they are very
great men who have favoured the world with many useful
and profound discoveries.
Crito: [•He is now laying on really thick his sarcastically intended
rhetoric in favour of the minute philosophers. He will soon drop it
14
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
altogether. •The proper names in this speech refer to real people; the
device of giving one’s targets ancient-sounding names was a common
practice in polemical writing at that time.] Moschon, for instance,
has proved that man and beast are really of the same nature,
and that consequently a man needs only to indulge his
senses and appetites to be as happy as a brute. Gorgias
has gone further, demonstrating that •man is a piece of
clock-work, a machine; and that •thought or reason are
the same thing as the collision of balls. Cimon has made
distinguished use of these discoveries, proving as clearly
as any proposition in mathematics that conscience is a
whim and morality a prejudice; and that a man is no more
accountable for his actions than a clock is for striking. What
Tryphon has written about the usefulness of vice can’t be
refuted. Thrasenor has destroyed the foolish prejudice men
had against atheism, showing that a republic of atheists
might live very happily together. Demylus has made a joke
of loyalty, and convinced the world that there’s nothing in it.
We owe to him, and to another philosopher of the same type,
the discovery that public spirit is a pointless fanaticism that
seizes only on weak minds. I could go on indefinitely reciting
the discoveries made by writers of this sect.
Lysicles: But the masterpiece and coup de grace ·for the old
system· is a learned work by our great Diagoras, containing
a demonstration of the nonexistence of God; it hasn’t yet
been published because the public are thought to be not
yet ripe for it, but I’m assured by some judicious friends
who have seen it that it’s as clear as daylight, and will
do a world of good by demolishing at one blow the whole
system of religion. These discoveries are published by our
philosophers, sometimes in bound books but often merely in
pamphlets and loose pages, making it easier for them to be
spread through the kingdom. They deserve the credit for the
absolute and independent freedom that is growing so fast
and frightening the bigots. Even dull and ignorant people
start to open their eyes and to be influenced by the example
and authority of so many able men.
Euphranor: It should seem by this account—·or rather by
what Crito last said·—that your sect extend their discoveries
beyond religion, and that the minute philosopher regards
loyalty to his king and reverence for the laws as low-down
things.
Lysicles: Very low-down. We are too wise to think there is
anything sacred about the king or the constitution, or indeed
about anything else. A man of sense may seem to show an
occasional deference to his king; but that’s as hollow as his
deference to God when he kneels at the sacrament so as to
qualify himself for an office [= ‘government job’]. ‘Fear God’ and
‘Honour the King’ are two slavish maxims that had for a long
time cramped human nature, and awed not only weak minds
but even men of good understanding, until their eyes were
opened by our philosophers.
Euphranor: It’s easy to see that when the fear of God is quite
extinguished, the mind must take a relaxed attitude to other
duties. As soon as those other duties lose their hold on the
conscience (which always presupposes the existence of a
God), they become mere outward pretences and formalities.
But I still thought that Englishmen of all schools of thought,
however much they may differ on many details, agreed in
the belief in God and accepted at least the propositions of
so-called natural religion.
Alciphron: I have already told you my own opinion on those
matters, and what I know to be the opinion of many others.
Crito: I think I know what has led you astray, Euphranor.
The minute philosophers are sometimes called deists [see note
on page 10], which has led you to imagine that they believe in
and worship a God according to the light of nature. But if
15
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
you live among them you’ll soon be convinced of the contrary.
They have neither •time, nor •place, nor •form of divine
worship; they don’t offer prayers or praises to God in public;
and in their private lives they show a disregard or dislike
even of the duties of natural religion. For example, saying
grace before and after meals: this is a plain point of natural
worship, and there was a time when everyone did it; but in
proportion as this sect ·of minute philosophers· prevailed,
it has been laid aside, not only by the minute philosophers
themselves. . . .but also by others who are afraid of being
thought fools by the minute philosophers.
Euphranor: Are you really saying that men who genuinely
believe in a God decline to perform such an easy and reasonable
duty for fear of being sneered at by atheists?
Crito: Yes, I am. Many people who believe in their hearts the
truth of religion are afraid or ashamed to admit it, lest they
should lose their standing in the eyes of those who have the
•good luck to be regarded as great wits and men of genius.
Alciphron: We must make allowance for Crito’s prejudice,
Euphranor. He is a worthy gentleman, and means well; but
doesn’t it look like prejudice to ascribe the respect that is
paid our ingenious free-thinkers to •good luck rather than
to merit?
Euphranor: I’m sure their merit is very wonderful. It would
take a great man to prove such paradoxes—e.g. that someone
as knowledgeable as a minute philosopher should be a mere
machine, or at best no better than a brute!
Alciphron: It is a true maxim that a man should think with
the learned, and speak with the vulgar. [Berkeley had already
famously said this in his Principles of Human Knowledge. Regarding
‘the vulgar’, see note on page 7.] I would be very reluctant to
describe a gentleman of merit as ‘a machine’ to an audience
of prejudiced and ignorant men. The doctrines of •our
philosophy have something in common with •many other
truths in metaphysics, geometry, astronomy, and natural
science, namely that vulgar ears can’t bear them! All our
discoveries and ideas are in themselves true and certain;
but they are at present known only to the better people, and
would sound strange and odd among the vulgar. It’s to be
hoped that this will eventually wear off.
Euphranor: I’m not surprised that vulgar minds should be
startled by the ideas of your philosophy.
Crito: Truly a very curious sort of philosophy, and much to
be wondered at!!
13. The deep thinkers in the minute philosophy camp
have gone in exactly the opposite way to all the great philosophers
of earlier ages, who tried •to raise and refine humanity,
removing it as far as possible from the brute; •to moderate
and subdue men’s appetites; •to remind men of the dignity of
their nature; •to awaken and improve their higher faculties,
and direct them onto the noblest objects; •to fill men’s minds
with a high sense of God, of the supreme good, and of the
immortality of the soul. . . . But our minute philosophers
seem to go the opposite way from all other wise and thoughtful
men; because they aim •to erase from the mind of man
the sources of all that is great and good, •to disrupt the
order of civil life, •to undermine the foundations of morality,
and. . . .•to bring us down to the maxims and way of thinking
of the most uneducated and barbarous nations, and even to
pull humanity down to the level of brute beasts. And through
all this they want to be accepted by the world as men of deep
knowledge. But all this negative knowledge—does it come
down to anything better than downright savage ignorance?
That there is no God, no spirit, no after-life, no moral duty:
truly a fine system for an honest man to accept or for a clever
man to be proud of!
16
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
Alciphron, who heard this discourse with some uneasiness,
very gravely replied. ‘Disputes are not to be decided by
the weight of authority,’ he said, ‘but by the force of reason.
Call our notions brutish and barbarous if you please; but
it’s a kind of ‘brutishness’ and ‘barbarism’ that few people
would be capable of if men of the greatest genius hadn’t
cleared the log-jam, because there’s nothing harder than to
overcome one’s upbringing and conquer old prejudices. It
takes great courage and great strength of faculties to pick out
and cast off a heap of rubbish that has been gathering in the
soul from our very infancy. So our philosophers thoroughly
deserve to be called esprits forts, ‘men of strong heads’,
‘free-thinkers’ and so on, labels that indicate great strength
and freedom of mind. The heroic labours of these men
may be represented (for anything can be misrepresented) as
piratically plundering and stripping the mind of its wealth
and ornaments, when really they are only divesting it of its
prejudices, and reducing it to its untainted original state of
nature—beautiful, pure nature!
Euphranor: You seem to be impressed by the beauty of
nature. Please, Alciphron, tell me what the things are that
you regard as natural; how are we to recognize something as
natural?
14. Alciphron: For a thing to be natural to the mind of
man (to start with that special case), it must
•appear in the human mind originally [= ‘from the outset’
= ‘from birth’],
•be present universally in the minds of all men, and
•be invariably the same in all nations and ages.
These three—originalness, universality, invariability—
exclude all the notions that humans have as results of
custom and upbringing. This also holds for all other species
of beings. A cat’s inclination to pursue a mouse is natural,
because it satisfies the above three criteria; but if a cat
is taught to play tricks, you won’t say that the tricks are
natural. For the same reason, if peaches and apricots are
grafted onto a plum-tree, nobody will say they are the natural
growth of that tree.
Euphranor: Let’s get back to the human case: it seems that
the only things you’ll count as natural in mankind are ones
that show themselves at the time of a person’s first entrance
into the world—namely the senses, and such passions and
appetites as reveal themselves as soon as their respective
objects appear—·e.g. hunger when there is milk, fear when
there is a loud noise, and so on·.
Alciphron: That is my opinion.
[Q&A note. Euphranor now asks Alciphron seven rhetorical questions,
to the first six of which Alciphron gives the expected answers, including
‘It seems so’, ‘I do’, and ‘It is true’. To spare us the tedious questionand-answer
routine, the questions will appear here as simple statements,
with the first six answers omitted. This condensing device will be used on
fourteen other occasions, each marked by •four or more statements by
Euphranor labelled with roman numerals, and •a mention of this note.]
Euphranor: (i) The leaves, blossom and apples of an apple
tree are natural to it, although it doesn’t have them from
the outset. (ii) The appetite of lust and the faculty of reason
are natural to a man even though they don’t shoot forth,
open, and display themselves—as leaves and blossoms do
in a tree—until long after his original infancy. (iii) So it
seems that you were being rash when you said that the first
criterion for something’s being natural to the mind was that
it should appear in it originally. (iv) Also, it is natural for an
orange tree to produce oranges. (v) But if you plant such
a tree at the north end of Great Britain, you may if you
work hard at it get a good salad [i.e. leaves but no fruit]; in the
southern parts of the island, hard careful work may get it
17
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
to produce mediocre fruit; but in Portugal or Naples it will
produce much better fruit with little or no trouble on the
part of the farmer. (vi) The plant is the same in all these
places, but it doesn’t produce the same fruit; sun, soil, and
cultivation make a difference. (vii) And since according to
you it’s the same story for every species, can’t we conclude
that some things may be natural to mankind although they
are not found in all men and aren’t invariably the same
where they are found?
Alciphron: Hold on, Euphranor! You must explain yourself
further. I shan’t be rushed into conceding your points.
Lysicles: You’re right to be wary, Alciphron. I don’t like these
ensnaring questions.
Euphranor: I don’t want you to go along with me out of
politeness. Just tell me what you think about each particular
matter, so that we understand one another, know what we
agree on, and proceed together in finding out the truth. . . .
Alciphron: Our opinions will stand the test. We fear no trial;
proceed as you please.
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) We seem to have
found that things may be natural to men without actually
being on display in all men or not as completely on display,
because differences of culture and other advantages affect
what comes of human nature as much as they do with the
nature of plants (I am using your own comparison). (ii)
Men at all times and places, when they arrive at a certain
age, express their thoughts by speech. (iii) So it seems
that language is natural. (iv) Yet there is a great variety
of languages. (v) From all this it follows that a thing may
be natural and yet admit of variety. (vi) It seems to follow
that a thing may be natural to mankind without having
the marks of naturalness that you present—i.e. without
being original, universal, and invariable. (vii) Consequently,
religious worship and civil government may be natural to
man, despite the fact that they occur in a variety of forms
and in different degrees of perfection. (viii) You have granted
already that reason is natural to mankind. (ix) So whatever
is agreeable to reason is agreeable to the nature of man. (x)
Doesn’t it follow from this that truth and virtue are natural
to man?
Alciphron: Whatever is reasonable I admit to be natural.
Euphranor: The fruits that we value most are the ones that
come from the most strongly growing and mature stock, in
the choicest soil. Similarly, then, oughtn’t we to value most
the sublime truths that are the fruits of mature thought, and
have been rationally deduced by men with the best and most
developed minds? And if this is right, and these things are
in fact reasonable, natural, and true, they oughtn’t to be
written off as unnatural whims, errors of upbringing, and
groundless prejudices, just •because they are raised and
developed by manuring and cultivating young human minds,
i.e. •because they take root early, and bring forth early fruit,
through the care and diligence of our instructors.
Alciphron: Agreed, provided that they can still be rationally
deduced: but to take for granted that what men vulgarly
call ‘the truths of morality and religion’ have a rational
basis would be begging the question. [He means that it would
be, in effect, including the conclusion of one’s argument amongst its
premises. That was the only meaning of ‘beg the question’ until late
in the 20th century, when the vulgar—specifically the ones working as
journalists—learned the phrase and assumed that it meant ‘raise the
question’.]
Euphranor: You’re right about that; so I don’t take for granted
that the truths of morality and religion are rationally deduced.
I only suppose that if they are, then they must be regarded
as natural to man—i.e. that they fit with and grow from the
18
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
most excellent part of human nature, the part that other
natural species don’t have.
Alciphron: I have no objection to bring against this.
Euphranor: Then what are we to think of your former assertions?
I mean your claims that
anything that is natural to man can be found in all
men, in all nations and ages of the world;
and that
to obtain a genuine view of human nature, we must
set aside all the effects of upbringing and instruction,
and look only at the senses, appetites, and passions,
that are to be found originally in all mankind;
and that therefore
the notion of a God can’t be based in nature because
it isn’t originally in the mind, and isn’t the same in all
men.
How do you reconcile these ·opening statements of yours·
with your recent concessions—ones that the force of truth
seems to have extorted from you?
15. Alciphron: Tell me, Euphranor, isn’t truth a single
uniform invariable thing? And if it is, isn’t the existence of
the many different and ·mutually· inconsistent notions that
men have of God and duty a plain proof there is no truth in
them?
Euphranor: I freely grant that truth is constant and uniform,
so that two opinions that contradict one another can’t both
be true; but it doesn’t follow that they are both false! When
there are conflicting opinions about the same thing, the
one (if there is one) that is grounded on clear and evident
reasons should be regarded as true, and others accepted only
to the extent that they are consistent with that privileged
one. Reason is the same at all times and places, and when
it is used properly it will lead to the same conclusions. Two
thousand years ago Socrates seems to have reasoned himself
into the same notion of a God that is entertained by the
philosophers of our days (if you’ll allow someone who isn’t
a free-thinker to be called ‘philosopher’!). And consider
Confucius’s remark that a man should be on guard in his
youth against lust, in manhood against quarrelsomeness,
and in old age against greed—this morality is as current in
Europe as in China.
Alciphron: But when opinions differ, that shows that there is
uncertainty; so it would be good if all men thought the same
way.
Euphranor: What do you think to be the cause of a lunar
eclipse?
Alciphron: The earth’s coming between the sun and moon,
making a shadow on the moon.
Euphranor: Are you sure of this?
Alciphron: Certainly.
Euphranor: Are all mankind agreed in this truth?
Alciphron: By no means. Ignorant and barbarous people give
different ridiculous explanations for this phenomenon.
Euphranor: So it seems that there are different opinions
about the nature of an eclipse.
Alciphron: There are.
Euphranor: Yet one of these opinions is true.
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: Thus, when there are conflicting opinions about
something, it may still be the case that the thing exists and
one of the opinions about it is true.
Alciphron: I accept that.
Euphranor: Well, you argued from the variety of opinions
about God’s •nature to the falsity of the opinion that he
19
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
•exists; and now it seems that this argument is not conclusive.
And I don’t see, either, how you can infer the falsity of
any moral or religious tenet from men’s conflicting opinions
on the same subject. Isn’t arguing like that on a par with
arguing that no historical account of a matter of fact can be
true if reports of it conflict with one another? Or arguing that
because the various schools of philosophy maintain different
opinions, none of them can be in the right—not even the
minute philosophers?
During this conversation Lysicles seemed uneasy, like
someone who profoundly wanted there to be no God. ‘Alciphron,’
he said, ‘I think you are sitting tamely on the
side-lines while Euphranor undermines the foundation of
our tenets.’
‘Don’t be afraid’, replied Alciphron: ‘A skillful player of
a game sometimes ruins his adversary by giving him some
advantage at first. I am glad’, he said, turning to Euphranor,
‘that you’re willing to argue and make your appeals to reason.
For my part, I shan’t be afraid to follow wherever reason
leads. So let me say this openly, Euphranor: I freely concede
the points you have been contending for. I don’t value
the success of a few crude notions thrown out in a casual
conversation, any more than the Turks care about the loss
of the rubbish-infantry that they position at the front of their
armies so as to waste the gunpowder and blunt the swords
of their enemies. I have kept a good half of my arguments
in reserve, and I am ready to bring them forward. I will
undertake to prove. . . ’
Euphranor: I don’t doubt your ability to prove, Alciphron!
But, before I put you to the trouble of any more proofs, I’d
like to know whether the notions of your minute philosophy
are worth proving. I mean, whether they are useful and
helpful to mankind.
16. Alciphron: As to that, let me tell you: a thing can be
useful to one man’s views and not to another’s; but truth is
truth, whether or not it’s useful, and it mustn’t be evaluated
by whether it is convenient for this or that man or sect.
Euphranor: But isn’t the general good of mankind to be
regarded as a rule, or guide to evaluation, of moral truths—
indeed of all truths that direct or influence the moral actions
[see note on page 14] of men?
Alciphron: It’s not clear to me that that is right. I know
of course that legislators, theologians and politicians have
always maintained that it is necessary for ‘the well-being
of mankind’ that men should be kept in awe by the slavish
notions of religion and morality. But even if you are right
about what is convenient or helpful, how does that prove
these ·moral· notions to be true? Convenience is one thing,
and truth is another; so a real philosopher will set aside •all
advantages and consider only •truth itself.
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, is your real philosopher a
wise man or a fool?
Alciphron: Without question, he’s the wisest of men.
Euphranor: As between •someone who acts with design and
•someone who acts at random, which should we regard as
the wiser?
Alciphron: The one who acts with design.
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] Well then: (i) Whoever
acts with design, acts for some end. (ii) And a wise man acts
for a good end. (iii) And he shows his wisdom in his choice of
means to the end he aims at. (iv) And so the more excellent
the pursued end is, and the more appropriate the chosen
means to it are, the wiser the person should be thought to
be. Now, (v) a rational agent can’t aim at a more excellent
end than happiness. (vi) Of good things, the greater good is
20
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
most excellent. (vii) The general happiness of mankind is a
greater good than the private happiness of one man, or of
some particular class of men. (viii) So the general happiness
of mankind is the most excellent end. (ix) So those who
pursue this end by the most appropriate methods should
be regarded as the wisest men. (x) A wise man is governed
by wise notions rather than foolish ones. (xi) It seems to
follow that someone who promotes the general well-being of
mankind by the proper necessary means is truly wise, and
acts on wise grounds. (xii) Furthermore, folly is the opposite
of wisdom. (xii) So mightn’t we infer that men who try to
dislodge principles that have a necessary connection with
the general good of mankind are foolish?
Alciphron: Perhaps this might be granted: but at the same
time I have to say that it is in my power to deny it.
Euphranor: What? You admit the premises, so surely you
won’t deny the conclusion!
Alciphron: I want to know what the rules are for our debate.
In this process of question and answer, if a man makes a
slip is he allowed to recover? For, if you are on the lookout
for every advantage that you can snatch, without allowing
for surprise or inattention ·on my part·, I have to tell you
that this is not the way to convince me of your views.
Euphranor: I’m not aiming at triumph, Alciphron! All I want
is truth. So it’s completely open to you to unravel all that
has been said, and to correct any slip you have made. But
then you must point it out clearly; otherwise we can’t ever
arrive at any conclusion.
Alciphron: I am ·also· sincerely devoted to truth, and agree
with you on these terms to proceed together in search of it.
In the course of our present inquiry, I think I slipped when
I acknowledged that the general happiness of mankind is a
greater good than the particular happiness of one man. In
fact, the individual happiness of each man alone constitutes
his own entire good. The happiness of other men is not a part
of my happiness, so from my standpoint it isn’t a good—I
mean a true natural good. So it can’t be a reasonable end for
me to aim at, because no wise man will pursue an end that
doesn’t concern him. (I am talking about true, natural ends,
not the ends one might announce as political pretences).
This is the voice of nature—the fountain, source and pattern
of all that is good and wise.
Euphranor: So would you like to follow nature, and accept
her as a guide and as a pattern for you to imitate?
Alciphron: I want that more than anything.
Euphranor: Where do you get this respect for nature from?
Alciphron: From the excellence of its productions.
Euphranor: For example, you say that there is usefulness
and excellence in a plant, because its many parts are connected
and fitted to each other in such a way as to protect
and nourish the whole plant, make the •individual grow, and
propagate the •species, and also because we get pleasure
and benefit from it—·grapes from a vine, shade or timber
from an oak·.
Alciphron: Just so.
Euphranor: Similarly, don’t you infer the excellence of animal
bodies from observing the structure and fitness of their
many parts, which enables the parts to work together for the
well-being of each other as well as of the whole animal? Don’t
you also notice a natural union and co-operation between animals
of the same species, and that even animals of different
species have certain qualities and instincts through which
they contribute to the exercise, nourishment, and delight
of each other? Even inanimate inorganic materials seem to
have an excellence relative to each other. Why would water
be excellent if it didn’t cause herbs and vegetables to spring
21
Alciphron George Berkeley First Dialogue
from the earth, and put forth flowers and fruit? And what
would become of the beauty of the •earth if it weren’t warmed
by the •sun, moistened by •water, and fanned by •air? [Note
the four ‘elements’ of ancient Greek philosophy.] Throughout the
whole system of the visible and natural world, don’t you see
a mutual connection and correspondence of parts? And isn’t
that the basis for your idea of the perfection, and order, and
beauty of nature?
Alciphron: I accept all this.
Euphranor: Now, didn’t the Stoics (who were no more bigots
than you are) say—and didn’t you say a few minutes ago—
that this pattern of ·natural· order is one that rational agents
ought to imitate?
Alciphron: I don’t deny that this is true.
Euphranor: So oughtn’t we infer the same union, order, and
regularity in the moral world that we see in the natural
world?
Alciphron: We ought.
Euphranor: Shouldn’t it seem to follow from this that reasonable
creatures were. . . .made for one another, and consequently
that a man who wants live according to nature ought
to consider himself not •as an independent individual whose
happiness is unconnected with the happiness of others, but
rather •as the part of a whole, for whose common good he
ought work together with the other parts, ·i.e. other men·?
Alciphron: Supposing this to be true, what then?
Euphranor: Won’t it follow that a wise man should consider
and pursue his own private good in the light of and in
combination the good of other men?—you granted this point,
but later said that that was a slip. Indeed, ·the point
doesn’t need a fancy argument by me, because· it has always
been seen to be clearly proved by •how we feel for one
another’s pain and pleasure, and by •the mutual affections
by which mankind are knit together; and because it was
the constant doctrine of those who were thought the wisest
and most thoughtful men among the ancients—Platonists,
Aristotelians, and Stoics—not to mention Christians, whom
you pronounce to be an unthinking prejudiced sort of people.
Alciphron: I shan’t dispute this point with you.
Euphranor: Well, then, since we are in agreement up to
here, shouldn’t it seem to follow from the premises that if
the beliefs in a God, a future state, and moral duties are
necessarily connected with the well-being of mankind, then
those beliefs are the only wise, right, and genuine sources
of human conduct. You have been led to this conclusion by
your own concessions, and by the analogy of nature [i.e. by
the thesis that human conduct •ought to fall into patterns that natural
events •do fall into].
Alciphron: I have been drawn into it step by step through
many preliminaries, and I can’t now remember them all
clearly. But I would point out that you rely on the thesis
that those ·religious and moral· principles are necessarily
connected with the well-being of mankind—and that’s
something that you haven’t proved and I haven’t granted.
[Berkeley’s text, like this version of it, leaves unclear what direction
of ‘necessary connection’ in question: either (a) the beliefs in God etc.
inevitably contribute to human well-being, or (b) without them human
well-being is impossible.]
Lysicles: I think it’s a great big fundamental prejudice; and
if I had time I could show you that that’s what it is. But it’s
late now; shall we put off this subject till tomorrow?
With that, we put an end to our conversation for that
evening.
22
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
Second dialogue (Tuesday)
[In the original work, though not in this version, this dialogue is the
second-to-longest of the set. It’s not very interesting philosophically; and
(a connected fact) in it the free-thinking side is upheld only by Lysicles,
with Alciphron silent throughout.]
1. Next morning Alciphron and Lysicles said that the
weather was so fine that they would like to spend the day
outside, having a picnic meal under a shade in some pleasant
part of the countryside. So we went to a nearby beach and
walked on the sands. . . .until the sun became too hot to be
comfortable. We then went in among the trees and sat down;
and immediately Lysicles addressed himself to Euphranor:
‘I’m now ready to make good on my undertaking to show
there is nothing in the ‘necessary connection’ that some
men imagine there to be between •the principles you are
defending and •the public good. If the question were to be
decided by the authority of legislators or philosophers, of
course it would go against us. That’s because those men
generally take it for granted that
•vice is harmful to the public, and that
•the only way to keep men from vice is through their
fear of God, and their sense of an after-life;
from which they infer that
•the belief in such things is necessary to the well-being
of mankind.
This false notion has held sway for centuries, and has done
an infinite amount of mischief. It has been the real cause
of religions’ being established within states, and of the way
laws and magistrates have protected and encouraged the
clergy and their superstitions. Even some of the wisest
ancient philosophers—ones who agreed with our sect in
denying the existence of a God and the immortality of the
soul—were weak enough to accept the common prejudice
that vice is hurtful to human societies. But England has
recently produced great philosophers who have undeceived
the world, and conclusively shown that private vices are public
benefits. [This was the subtitle of Mandeville’s notorious Fable of
the Bees. Lysicles will now devote about a page to presenting arguments
taken from Mandeville.] It wasn’t until now that this discovery
was made, and our sect ·of free-thinkers· has the glory of it.
Crito: [back to sarcasm!] It may be that some men with fine
intellects did in former ages have a glimpse of this important
truth; but probably they lived at ignorant times and in
bigoted countries that weren’t ripe for such a discovery.
Lysicles: Men of few talents and short sight, being able to see
no further than •one link along a chain of consequences, are
shocked at small evils that come with vice. But those who
can take in more, and look along •a lengthy series of events,
can see thousands of examples of happiness resulting from
vice, and of good growing out of evil. I shan’t trouble you
with authoritative writers or elaborate arguments; let’s just
look at some plain matters of fact. Take each particular vice
and track it through all its effects and consequences, and
you clearly see the advantage it brings to the public.
2. Drunkenness, for instance, is a harmful vice, according
to your sober moralists; but that’s because they didn’t
take into account the good effects that flow from it. [Lysicles
goes on to describe some of these. For ‘vulgar drunkenness’:
income from a tax on malt, and employment for many different
kinds of workers in the beer industry. For ‘drunkenness
caused by wine and spirits’: admittedly that sends money
into foreign countries, but it creates employment in the home
country—vastly increased and proliferated by the need for
23
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
ships. Then there are all the trades involved in making things
that ships export to pay for the wine and spirits. And every
trade is supported by, and supports, yet further trades; so
that there’s no end to the good that comes from drunkenness.
Then:]
Equally stupidly, your half-witted folk are given to condemning
gaming [here = ‘playing cards for money’]. . . . On the
face of it, card-playing seems to be a very idle and useless
occupation; but if you dig down below the face of it you’ll see
that this idle pastime employs the card-maker, who provides
work for the paper-mills, which support the poor man who
collects discarded rags; not to mention the. . . .workers who
are employed in building and equipping those mills. Look still
deeper and you’ll find that •candles ·to light the games· and
the hiring of sedan-chairs ·to take the players to the game·
employ the industrious and the poor; in this way they are
helped by card-sharpers and gentlemen who wouldn’t give a
penny in charity. You may object that many gentlemen and
ladies are ruined by gaming, but if you do, you aren’t taking
into account that what one man loses another gets, so that
as many are enriched as are ruined. Money changes hands;
that’s what the life of business and commerce consists
in—the circulation of money. When money is spent, the
public doesn’t care who spends it. Suppose an upper-class
fool is cheated by a very low-bred fellow who has more
brains—what harm does this do to the public? Poverty is
relieved, ingenuity is rewarded, the money stays at home. . . .
You may object that a man made poor by gaming may resort
to some desperate conduct that will be hurtful to the public.
[Lysicles goes on to speak of the good a highwayman can
do, mainly by spending extravagantly during his ‘short and
merry life’, but also through the reward that may go to a
poor family that turns him in to the police.]
My topic was gaming, which smoothly led me to the
advantages of highway robbery. Oh the beautiful and neverenough-admired
connection of vices! It would take too long
to show how they all hang together, and what an infinite
amount of good arises from each of them. I’ll add just a few
words now on a favourite vice, then I’ll leave you to work
out the rest of the story for yourself—I’ve shown you how.
Consider a poor girl who doesn’t have what you would call an
‘honest’ half-crown a week to spend: she has the good luck
to become someone’s kept mistress, and immediately she
employs milliners, laundresses, dressers, fabric-sellers, and
a number of other trades, all to the benefit of her country.
We could go on for ever tracking every particular vice through
its consequences and effects, showing the vast advantage
they all bring to the public. The true springs that drive
the great machine of commerce and make the state flourish
have been little understood until now. Your moralists and
theologians have •long been corrupting the genuine sense
of mankind, filling men’s heads with •absurd principles—so
•long and so •absurd that few men now can look at life with
an unprejudiced eye. And fewer still have the talents and
intelligence to pursue a long chain of consequences, relations
and dependences, which is what you must do if you want to
form a sound and complete notion of the public welfare. . . .
3. ‘Oh!’ said Euphranor, who had listened to this speech
very attentively, ‘you are the very man I wanted, Lysicles—
eloquent and able, well-informed about the principles of your
sect, and willing to impart them to others! Tell me, is it easy
to get these principles accepted in the world?
Lysicles: It is easy among very able men and people of
fashion, though you’ll sometimes meet with strong prejudices
against them in people of the middle sort, an effect of
ordinary talents and low breeding.
24
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
Euphranor: I’d be surprised if men were not shocked at such
surprising notions, so contrary to all laws, education, and
religion.
Lysicles: They’d have been even more shocked if it hadn’t
been for the skillful writing style of our philosophers. Knowing
that most men are influenced by •names rather than by
•things, they have introduced a certain cleaned-up way of
speaking, which lessens much of the revulsion and prejudice
against vice.
Euphranor: Explain this for me.
Lysicles: Well, in our dialect an immoral man is a ‘man
of pleasure’, a card-sharper is one who ‘plays the whole
game’, an ·adulterous· lady is said to ‘have an affair’, an
·adulterous· gentleman is said to be ‘gallant’, a rogue in
business is said to be one who ‘knows the world’. By this
means we have no such things as ‘drunkards’, ‘womanisers’,
‘whores’ or ‘rogues’ in the fashionable world, whose
inhabitants can enjoy their vices without having nasty labels
attached to them.
Euphranor: So it seems that vice is a fine thing with an ugly
name.
Lysicles: Be assured it is.
Euphranor: Plato was afraid that young people might be
corrupted by the myths that represent the gods as vicious,
According to you, it seems, that attitude was an effect of his
weakness and ignorance.
Lysicles: It was, take my word for it.
Euphranor: Yet Plato had kept good company, and lived in
a court. And Cicero, who knew the world well, had a deep
respect for him.
Crito: Plato and Cicero may have looked good in ancient
Athens or Rome: but if they returned to life today they would
be regarded as underbred pedants. At most coffee-houses
in London there are several able men who could convince
Plato and Cicero that they knew nothing about morals and
politics—the very topics that they are valued so much for!
Lysicles: [Not the most sharp-witted of men, Lysicles hasn’t picked up
the note of sarcastic scorn in what Crito has just said.] I know ever
so many shrewd men, both in ·royal· court circles and in the
business parts of the city, who have five times Plato’s sense
and don’t care in the slightest what notion their sons have
of God or virtue.
4. Crito: I can illustrate this doctrine of Lysicles by
·two· examples that will make you perceive its force. [The
examples are fictional. •In the first, a minute philosopher
turns his son into a member of that sect, which leads to the
son’s murdering him and then squandering his estate until
he goes bankrupt. •In the second, a minute philosopher
converts his wife to his way of thinking (he rightly thinks
this will stop her from giving to charity); and this leads
her to adopt an extravagant way of life, including playing
cards for high stakes, thus using up most of her husband’s
wealth. In each case, Crito recites the Mandevillean ‘public
benefits’ of the behaviour in question: •the murderous son’s
recklessness spreads his inherited wealth more widely than
his miserly father ever would have done; •the extravagant
wife, through her gaming, transferred a considerable share of
her husband’s fortune ‘to a number of sharp-witted men who
needed it more and circulated it faster than her husband
would have done’.]
Crito maintained a straight face while he told these
stories, but I couldn’t help smiling, which Lysicles noticed.
‘Superficial minds’, he said, ‘may find something to ridicule
in these accounts; but anyone who is really competent in
rational thinking must see that a wise commonwealth ought
25
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
to encourage maxims that bring benefit to everyone and do
harm only to particular private persons or families.’
‘Speaking for myself,’ said Euphranor, ‘I declare that
I’m dazzled and bewildered, rather than convinced, by your
reasoning. As you yourself pointed out, it takes a great deal
of thought to grasp the connections of many distant points.
So—please put up with my slowness and allow me to take
to pieces something that is too big to be taken in all at once;
and when I can’t match your speed, allow me to follow you
step by step, as fast as I can.
Lysicles: That is reasonable. It’s not everyone who can all in
one swoop take in a long chain of argument.
5. Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) Your various
arguments seem to centre on this: vice circulates money and
promotes industry, which causes a people to flourish. (ii) And
vice produces this effect by causing extravagant consumption,
which is the most beneficial to the manufacturers—
giving them a quick demand and high price. (iii) So you
think that a drunkard, because he drinks more than other
men, brings more benefit to the brewer and the vintner than
other men do. (iv) A healthy man drinks more than a sick
man. (v) A sober man is healthier than a drunkard. So (vi) a
sober man in good health may drink more than a drunkard
when he is sick. (vii) A man will consume more meat and
drink in a long life than in a short one. (viii) So a sober
healthy man may in a long life circulate more money by
eating and drinking than a glutton or drunkard circulates in
a short life?
Lysicles: What of it?
Euphranor: Well, it seems that the sober healthy man may
be more beneficial to the public—I mean beneficial through
how he eats and drinks—than the glutton or the drunkard
is.
Lysicles: You’ll never get me to agree that temperance is the
way to promote drinking!
Euphranor: But you will agree that sickness lessens drinking,
and that death puts an end to it? The same argument will
hold, so far as I can see, for every vice that harms men’s
health and shortens their lives. And if that is so, the ‘public
benefits’ of vice won’t be so sure.
Lysicles: Granted some makers or traders might be as well
encouraged by the sober men as the vicious, what about the
ones whose livelihood depends entirely on vice and vanity?
Euphranor: If there are people like that, couldn’t they be
employed in some other way, without loss to the public? Tell
me, Lysicles, is there anything in the nature of vice in itself
that makes it a public blessing, or is it only the consumption
it causes?
Lysicles: I have already shown how it benefits the nation by
the consumption of things the nation manufactures.
Euphranor: And you have agreed that a long and healthy
life consumes more than a short and sickly one; and you
won’t deny that many consume more than one? You do the
math: which is more likely to promote the industry of his
countrymen, •a virtuous married man with healthy children
of his own who also feeds and clothes the orphans in his
neighbourhood, or •a fashionable loose-living man about
town? Doesn’t innocently spent money circulate as well as
money spent on vice? And if it does so, doesn’t your line of
thought imply that innocent activities benefit the public as
much as vicious ones?
Lysicles: What I have proved, I proved clearly, and nothing
more needs to be said about it.
Euphranor: I can’t see that you have proved anything unless
you can show that it is impossible to spend a fortune
innocently! I’d have thought that the public welfare of a
26
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
nation consists in the number and good condition of its
inhabitants; have you anything to object to this?
Lysicles: I think not.
Euphranor: Which would contribute more to this end—
•employing men in outdoor manly exercise, or •employing
them in sedentary business within doors?
Lysicles: The former, I suppose.
Euphranor: Doesn’t it seem to follow that building, gardening,
and agriculture would employ men more usefully to the
public than if tailors, barbers, perfumers, distillers, and the
like were multiplied?
Lysicles: Agreed, but this goes against you, because what
incites men to build and plant is vanity, and vanity is a vice.
Euphranor: But, if a man were to build and plant [meaning ‘to
employ people to build and plant’] •for his convenience or pleasure,
•in proportion to his fortune, •without foolish ostentation,
and •without exaggerating the value of his house and garden,
they wouldn’t be the effect of vice; and how do you know
that this can’t happen?
[The economic argument about whether and to what
extent private vices are public benefits continues through
many not very interesting pages, with Lysicles continuing to
be stubborn, and continuing not to understand the spirit in
which Crito extravagantly ‘supports’ the minute philosophers’
position—e.g. talking of all the good that had been done
by the 1666 fire in London, and the injustice done to a
free-thinker who in a purely principled way murdered his
father, and was hanged for it. They discuss a little the
question of whether it is dangerous to publish such views,
the answer being that it is safe on the anti-religious side of
the minute-philosophy doctrine, less so on the pro-vice legal
and political side. Lysicles says that he wants the whole
governmental and legal structure overhauled in the light of
the pro-vice principles that free-thinkers have discovered.
Then:]
9. Euphranor: You are, it seems, in favour of bringing
about a thorough reformation?
Lysicles: As for what is commonly called ‘the Reformation’, I
could never see how the world was the better for it. Protestantism
is much the same as Popery, except for being more
prudish and disagreeable. A noted writer of ours calculates
that the benefit of hooped petticoats is nearly equal to the
benefit of the •Reformation, but I think he is flattering •it.
·Coming back to your question·: Thorough reformation is
thorough liberty. Leave nature absolutely free to work her
own way, and all will be well. That’s what we aim at; our
principles won’t let us settle for less.
Crito is a zealous Protestant, and when he heard Lysicles’
passing jab at the Reformation he couldn’t refrain ·from
joining in, speaking his own mind rather than parodying the
free-thinkers·. ‘The worst effect of the Reformation’, he said,
‘was that it rescued wicked men from a darkness that had
kept them in awe. This has turned out to be holding out
light to robbers and murderers. ·And the light brought by
the Reformation may have done harm in another way too,
namely by encouraging free-thinking. It didn’t have to do
that·: light in itself is good, and the light that shows a man
the folly of ·popish· superstition might also show him the
truth of ·Protestant· religion and the madness of atheism.
But some people have used the light only to see the evils on
one side (Roman Catholicism), and to run blindly into the
arms of the worse evils of the opposite extreme (atheism).
That was to make the best of things produce evil in the way
that you show the worst things producing good—namely
accidentally or indirectly. . . .’
27
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
Lysicles was a little disconcerted by Crito’s emphatic tone;
but after a short pause he replied briskly that not everyone
has the talent to think about the public good.
‘True’, said Euphranor. ‘I also think that not everyone
can frame a notion of the public good, much less make good
judgments about how to promote it.
10. ‘But you, Lysicles, who are a master of this subject,
please tell me: doesn’t the public good of a nation imply the
particular good of its individuals?’
Lysicles: It does.
Euphranor: And doesn’t the good or happiness of a man
consist in his having both soul and body sound and in good
condition, enjoying the things that their natures require, and
free from things that are odious or hurtful to them?
Lysicles: I don’t deny that all this is true.
Euphranor: Well, it seems worthwhile to consider whether
the regular decent life of a virtuous man mightn’t be as
conducive to this as the mad sallies of intemperance and
debauchery.
Lysicles: I’ll admit that without the aid of vice a nation may
merely survive, be kept alive, but it can’t possibly flourish. To
get money and goods into rapid circulation in a State, there
must be extravagant and irregular motions in the appetites
and passions.
Euphranor: The more people a nation contains, and the
happier they are, the more that nation can be said to flourish.
I think we are agreed on this.
Lysicles: We are.
Euphranor: So you concede that riches are not an ultimate
end, but should be considered only as a means to happiness?
Lysicles: I do.
Euphranor: It seems that means can’t be useful unless we
know what the end is and how to apply the means to it.
Lysicles: It seems so.
Euphranor: Doesn’t it follow that in order to make a nation
flourish it isn’t enough to make it wealthy, without knowing
•what the true end and happiness of mankind is, and •how
to apply wealth towards achieving that end? To the extent
that these points are known and practised, I think the nation
would be likely to flourish. But for a people who don’t know
or practise them, gaining riches seems to me on a par with
letting a sick man have plenty of food and drink, which it
will harm him to consume.
Lysicles: This is just sophistry; it is arguing without persuading.
Look into how in general people live their lives,
examine the pursuits of men, have a due respect for the
people’s ways of interacting and getting on with one another,
and you’ll soon be convinced that a nation can be made
flourishing and happy through riches—just through riches.
Give them wealth and they will make themselves happy,
without that political invention, that trick of governments
and philosophers, called virtue.
[In the next few pages, which are not philosophically
very nourishing, the main topics of discussion are these.
•Whether virtue is a ‘trick of governments’. •Which segment
of the population should be listened to with respect (Lysicles
responds to Euphranor’s suggestion of ‘country gentlemen,
and farmers, and the better sort of tradesmen’ with blundering
rudeness). •If people in general are so open to prejudice,
mightn’t there be some prejudice in the minute philosophers’
position? •Bodily health is a real, objective state which can
be driven up or down by what is done to the body; why not
an analogous view of spiritual (or mental) health? Here is
how this last theme develops:]
28
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
Euphranor: Can’t we suppose that there is such a state as
a healthy constitution of the soul—the state it is in when
its notions are right, its judgments true, its will regular, its
passions and appetites kept moderate and directed to the
right objects?. . . . And the man whose mind is so constituted,
isn’t he properly called virtuous? And shouldn’t every good
man try to produce this healthy disposition in the minds
of his countrymen? If these things have any appearance of
truth, as they seem to me to have, it isn’t so obvious that
virtue is a mere whim or fashion ·or trick·, as you choose to
say it is. You took me by surprise when you said this, I must
admit, given the conversation we had about this yesterday
evening. If you call that back to your mind, it might perhaps
save both of us some trouble.
Lysicles: Frankly, Euphranor, I admit to having forgotten
everything you said about virtue, duty, and all that; the
points you made were of an airy notional nature, which
made them apt to vanish without leaving any trace in a
mind that is accustomed to receiving impression only from
realities.
13. At this Euphranor looked at Crito and me and said,
smiling, ‘I have been getting out of line; my role was to learn,
and his to instruct.’
[Then we have several pages about happiness and (especially)
pleasure, human pleasures versus animal ones, higher
pleasures versus lower ones, transient pleasures versus more
lasting ones, and so on. Euphranor alludes to ‘the sincerity,
the intensity, and the duration of pleasures’. At one point
Lysicles rhapsodizes about the pleasures of card-playing:]
Lysicles: People of fashion couldn’t live without cards. They
provide the most delightful way of passing an evening for an
assemblage of gentlemen and ladies who otherwise wouldn’t
know what to say or do with themselves. And a pack of cards
doesn’t merely give them something to do when they are
together; it also draws them together. Square-dancing gives
them a pleasure to look forward to during the dull hours of
the day, they reflect on it with delight, and it is something to
talk about when it is over.
Crito: So the chief amusement of these people of fashion is
an activity that any manual labourer can engage in, being
as well qualified to get pleasure from cards as a peer is! It
looks as though life is a drag for these people of fashion,
and that their fortunes aren’t doing them much good. I can
well imagine that when people of a certain sort are brought
together, they would prefer doing anything to the boredom of
their own conversation; but it isn’t easy to think that there’s
any great pleasure in this. . . .
Lysicles: Play [here = ‘playing cards for money’] is a serious amusement
that brings relief to a man of pleasure after the more
lively and affecting enjoyments of sense. It kills time better
than anything, and is a most admirable antidote to redirect
or prevent thoughts that might otherwise prey on the mind.
Crito: I can easily see that no man on earth ought to value
antidotes for irritable boredom more than a man of fashion
and pleasure! An ancient sage, speaking of someone of that
sort, says ‘he is made wretched by disappointments and
appetites’. And if this was true of the Greeks, who lived in
the sun and had so much spirit, I’m inclined to think it’s
even truer of our modern Englishmen. There’s something in
our climate and our make-up that makes it especially true
of us that idleness its own punishment: an uneducated fine
gentleman pays for his momentary pleasures with long and
cruel intervals of being bored and out of sorts; to relieve these
he is driven into sensual excesses which further depress his
spirits. His low condition, while creating a greater need for
pleasures, lessens his ability to enjoy them. An Englishman’s
29
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
cast of mind makes him the most unsuccessful rake in the
world. [A ‘rake’—a term that we’ll meet several times more—is a man
whose way of life is •stylish and fashionable but also •promiscuous and
dissolute.] He is, in Aristotle’s phrase, ‘at odds with himself’.
He isn’t brute enough to enjoy his appetites, or man enough
to govern them. He knows and feels that what he pursues is
not his true good; and when he looks inwards, all he finds
is the misery that his habitual sluggishness and idleness
won’t allow him to remedy. Eventually, having grown odious
to himself and hating his own company, he joins any idle
group that he can, not in the hope of pleasure but merely
to relieve the pain of his own mind. Listless and uneasy
in the present, he has no delight in reflecting on what is
past, or in the prospect of anything to come. When, after
a wretched lifetime of vanity and woe, his animal nature is
worn to the stumps, this man of pleasure alternates between
wanting death and dreading it; he is sick of living, without
ever having tried or known the true life of man.
Euphranor: [ironically] It’s just as well that this sort of life,
which is of so little benefit to its owner, brings so much
benefit to the public!. . . .
[Then some discussion of courage, and of why there aren’t
more disillusioned minute philosophers who commit suicide.
(Crito’s answer: Because they aren’t sure they are right about
God and the after-life.) Then:]
18. Euphranor: Socrates, who was no country parson,
suspected that your men of pleasure were such [i.e. were men
of pleasure] through ignorance.
Lysicles: Ignorance! Of what?
Euphranor: Of the art of computing [= ‘calculating’, as it were
mathematically]. He thought that rakes can’t do their sums,
and that because of this lack in their intellects they make
•wrong judgments about pleasure, where their happiness
depends on their making •right ones.
Lysicles: I don’t understand you.
Euphranor: Do you agree that the senses perceive only
•sensible things?
Lysicles: I do.
Euphranor: And the senses perceive only things that are
•present?
Lysicles: I accept that too.
Euphranor: So •pleasures of the understanding and •future
pleasures aren’t to be judged by the senses?
Lysicles: They are not.
Euphranor: So people who judge pleasures by the senses may
find themselves mistaken at the bottom line. [He quotes some
lines from the Latin satirical poet Persius, about someone
ending up with his joints ruined by gout, so that his limbs
are like brittle beech-tree branches, lamenting the way he
has spent his life and depressed at the thought of the kind
of life that lies ahead of him. Then:] To get the computation
right, shouldn’t you consider all the faculties, and all the
kinds of pleasure, taking the future into account as well
as the present, and rating them all according to their true
value?
Crito: The Epicureans held that
a pleasure that produces a greater pain, or that
hinders a greater pleasure
should be regarded as a pain; and that
a pain that produces a greater pleasure, or prevents a
greater pain
is to be accounted a pleasure. Thus, if we are to make a true
estimate of pleasure—that great spring of action from which
the conduct of life gets its direction—we have to compute
•intellectual pleasures and •future ones, as well as •sensible
30
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
pleasures and •present ones. And in estimating each particular
pleasure, we have to take into account all the pains
and evils, all the disgust, remorse and shame that come with
it. And we ought to take account of the kind as well as the
quantity of each pleasure. Let a free-thinker merely consider
how little human pleasure consists in •actual sensation, and
how much in •prospect! Then let him then compare the
prospect of a virtuous believer with that of an unbelieving
rake.
[Euphranor briefly joins in, and Lysicles responds sharply
that the free-thinkers ‘calculate that what you call a good
Christian. . . .must be unfit for the world’s affairs. Thus,
while you compute yourselves out of pleasure, others compute
you out of business.’ Then further conversation about
the personal characters of minute philosophers; and then
about how they spread their word—the role of writers in
this. The effects on the young of free-thinking ideas—savage
anecdotes about this by Crito. Then:]
Lysicles: . . . .Wouldn’t there always be rakes and rogues even
if we didn’t make them? Believe me, the world always was
and always will be the same, as long as men are men.
Crito: I deny that the world is always the same. Human
nature, to use Alciphron’s comparison, is like land, better
or worse depending on how it is managed and what seeds
or principles are sown in it. I agree there might be bad men
through the force of corrupt appetites and unruly passions,
even if nobody accepted your tenets; but when to the force
of appetite and passion men add the force of opinion, and
are wicked on principle, there will be more men who are
wicked and they will be more incurably and outrageously
wicked. The error of a •lively rake lies in his passions, and
may be reformed; but the •dry rogue who sets himself up in
judgments is incorrigible.
[More discussion of the characters of minute philosophers,
their place in history, and other related topics. then:]
Lysicles: We have a maxim, namely that each should take
care of one—·i.e. should take care of himself·.
Crito: Alas, Lysicles, you wrong your own character. You
minute philosophers want to get the world and yourselves to
accept you as cunning self-interested men; but can anything
be more disinterested [= ‘not self -interested’] than to give up all
concern with the theoretical pursuit of truth? Can anything
be less cunning than to publish your discoveries to the world,
teach others to play the whole game, and arm mankind
against yourselves? [Re ‘play the whole game’: see Lysicles’ speech
‘Well, in our dialect. . . ’ on page 25.]
22. To you folk who are fired with •love of truth and
•love of liberty and •grasping the whole extent of nature, I
suggest that to those loves you add •love of your country
(forgive me for introducing such a low-down thought!). I
would urge you to be cautious, in the same way that all
other discoverers, projectors, and makers of experiments
are; they never risk everything on the first trial. Wouldn’t it
be prudent to try the success of your principles on a small
model in some remote corner of the earth? For instance, set
up a colony of atheists in Monomotapa ·in southern Africa·
and see how it prospers, before you proceed any further at
home; half-a-dozen shiploads of minute philosophers could
easily be spared for such a good plan. In the meantime,
you gentlemen who have discovered that •there’s nothing
to be hoped or feared in an after-life, that •conscience is a
nagging pest, that •the bands of government and the cement
of human society are rotten things that can be dissolved
and crumbled into nothing by the arguments of any minute
philosopher: be so good as to keep these sublime discoveries
to yourselves, and allow all the rest of us to continue in the
31
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
beliefs and ways of thinking established by the laws of our
country. Speaking seriously, I do wish you would try your
experiments among the Hottentots or Turks.
Lysicles: We think well of the Hottentots, believing them
to be an unprejudiced people; but I’m afraid their diet and
customs wouldn’t agree with our philosophers. As for the
Turks, they are bigots who have a notion of God and a respect
for Jesus Christ. I doubt if it would be safe to venture among
them.
Crito: Then make your experiment in some other Christian
country.
Lysicles: We think that all other Christian nations are much
under the power of prejudice: even our neighbours the Dutch
are too much prejudiced in favour of their religion, which
their law has established, for a prudent man to attempt
innovations under their government. On the whole, it seems
that no country can offer as much security and prospect of
success for our schemes as England does. Not to mention
the fact that we have already made good progress. . . .
23. The right way to start this experiment was to wipe
out the prejudices of individual persons. We have carried
on this work for many years, working hard and skillfully, at
first secretly. . . . As our principles gained acceptance and
as our numbers grew, we gradually revealed ourselves and
our opinions; and I needn’t tell you where we have now come
to. We have grubbed and weeded and cleared human nature
so thoroughly that before long you’ll see natural and sound
ideas sprout up by themselves, without any labouring or
teaching.
[Crito reports the view of a wise man, whom he doesn’t
name, ‘that the worst and most unwholesome weed was this
same minute philosophy’. From there he moves to recounting
a ‘fable’ about a contest in hell to select the devil who could
do most harm to humanity. The runner-up appeared as
gunpowder, producing great noise and destruction and fear.
The winner set up as a pharmacist, thus:] He passed as a
friend and a physician through the world, disguised himself
with sweets and perfumes and drugs, made his way into
pharmacies and ladies’ cabinets, and, under a pretence of
helping digestion, comforting the spirits, and cheering the
heart, he produced direct contrary effects and, quietly and
invisibly, pushed great numbers of mankind into a fatal
decay [i.e. a decay that was ‘fatal’ in the sense of being fated, inevitable,
unstoppable]. He populated hell and the grave so fast that he
earned the post of ruler of hell, which he still holds.
24. Lysicles: Those who please may amuse themselves
with fables and allegories. This is plain English: liberty is a
good thing, and we are the support of liberty.
Crito: It seems to me that •liberty and •virtue were made
for each other. If someone wants to enslave his country, the
best preparation for that is vice, and nothing leads to vice so
surely as irreligion does. I simply can’t understand (and I
have tried) how this hostility to religion can be an effect of
honest views regarding a just and legal liberty. . . . Let us
examine what good your principles have done: who has been
the better for the instructions of these minute philosophers?
Let us compare what we •are in respect of learning, loyalty,
honesty, wealth, power and public spirit with what we •have
been. Free-thinking (as it is called) has grown amazingly in
recent years. Let us see what has grown up along with it
or as a result of it. I shan’t list all the resultant ills (that
would be a nasty task), and on the other side there is the
only blessing that the minute philosophy can claim, namely
luxury—the same ‘blessing’ that opened up ancient Rome to
the world’s revenge, the same luxury that makes a nation
look full and fat when it actually has one foot in the grave.
32
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
Lysicles: You have this wrong. Our sect think and argue
better than anyone about the public good of a State; and
we have invented [here = ‘discovered’] many things that are
conducive to the public good but can’t yet conveniently be
put into practice.
Crito: But the public has received one advantage from the
spread of your principles, namely the old Roman practice
of self-murder. This puts an end to all distress, stopping
miserable people from going on being a burden to the world
and to themselves.
Lysicles: You chose to make some remarks about this
custom a little while ago [page 30], and to laugh at the
irresolution of our free-thinkers ·who couldn’t make up their
minds to kill themselves·. But I can tell you as a matter of
fact that they have often recommended it by their example
as well as by arguments; and that it is solely because of
them that this practice, useful and magnanimous as it is,
has been •taken out of the hands of lunatics and •restored
to the status among men of sense that it had in ancient
times. In whatever light you may look at it, this is in fact
a solid benefit. But the best effect of our principles is the
light and truth that they have so visibly spread through the
world. The number of prejudices, errors, perplexities, and
contradictions that we have cleared out of the minds of our
fellow-subjects! The number of hard words and intricate
absurd notions that possessed the minds of men before our
philosophers appeared in the world! Now even women and
children have right and sound notions of things. What do
you say to this, Crito?
Crito: I say, regarding these great advantages of destroying
men and notions, that I doubt that the public gains as much
by the destruction of notions as it loses by the destruction
of men. Speaking for myself, I had rather my wife and
children all had beliefs with no real thoughts behind them
and daily pronounced words without a meaning, than that
any one of them should cut her throat, or leap out of a
window. The public doesn’t care much about errors and
nonsense, as such; it is less concerned with whether a
notion is metaphysically true than with whether it will tend
to produce good or evil. Truth itself is valued by the public,
because it does have an influence and is felt in the course
of life. . . . But the minute philosophers are not the men to
whom we owe most for discoveries of that kind. I’m making
this point on the basis that your notions are in fact true;
and in fact I don’t think they are. Candidly, I think they are
·not only •harmful but also •false·. The •tendency of your
opinions is so bad that no good man can endure them, and
your •arguments for them are so weak that no wise man will
accept them.
Lysicles: Hasn’t it been proved—as clear as the midday
sun—that since the spreading of our principles the more
smoothly civilised sort of men have led much happier lives,
and have been swimming in pleasure? But I don’t want to
repeat things that I have already proved, so I’ll add just one
point: our principles bring advantages even to very small
children, and to women; they deliver children from terrors
by night, and ladies from intensely bored hours by day.
[Crito fiercely attacks this, saying that we should compute
what a ‘liberated’ lady will •give up against what she will •get
through the minute philosophy, and that at the bottom line
‘you shall find that empty, giddy, gaudy, fluttering thing, not
half so happy as a butterfly or a grasshopper on a summer’s
day’. Similarly for the ‘liberated’ man, ending with this:
‘When his sense and appetite fade, and he seeks refuge from
his conscience in the minute philosophy, the real truth about
him is that he •affects much, •believes little, •knows nothing.’
33
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
Lysicles makes couple of short interventions, in the second
of them saying that none of this ‘will make our principles
less true’. Crito snaps back:]
Crito: Their •truth is not what we are talking about; our
present topic is the •usefulness of your principles. And to
decide this, all we need is to get an overview of them, fairly
stated and laid side by side:
•There is no God or providence.
•Man is as the beasts that perish.
•Man’s happiness, like that of the beasts, consists in
obeying animal instincts, appetites, and passions.
•All stings of conscience and sense of guilt are prejudices
and errors of upbringing.
•Religion is a State trick.
•Vice is beneficial to the public.
•The soul of man is corporeal, and dissolves like a
flame or vapour.
•Man is a machine, driven according to the laws of
motion.
•So he does not act, and can’t be guilty of anything.
•A wise man evaluates and chooses all his actions in
this life on the basis of his own individual self-interest.
It seems that these opinions and others like them are the
tenets of a minute philosopher—who is himself, according
to his own principles, an organ played on by perceptible
objects, a ball swatted about by appetites and passions.
He is so acute-minded that he can maintain all this by
skillful reasoning, so sharp-sighted and penetrating and
deep that he can discover that the only true wisdom is
the most self-interested secret cunning. To round out this
character-sketch: this ingenious piece of clockwork, having
no source of action within itself and denying that it has or
can have a single free thought or motion, sets itself up as the
protector of liberty, and argues earnestly for free-thinking!
The moment Crito stopped speaking, Lysicles addressed
himself to Euphranor and me: ‘Crito’, he said, ‘has taken
a vast amount of trouble but has convinced me of only one
solitary thing, namely that I haven’t a hope of convincing
him. Never in my whole life have I met with a man so deeply
immersed in prejudice; I leave it others to pull him out ·of
the mire·. But I have better hopes of ·convincing· you.
‘Speaking for myself,’ I said, ‘I can answer that my eyes
and ears are always open to conviction; I attend to everything
that is said, and my over-all final judgment, whether right
or wrong, will ·at least· be quite impartial.’
Euphranor: Crito is bolder than I am, undertaking in this
way to scold and lecture a philosopher! For my part, I always
find it easier to learn than to teach. So I’ll ask for your help
in ridding me of some worries about the practical effects of
your opinions—a topic that I haven’t been able to get on top
of, though ever so willing. When this is done, perhaps we
still won’t tread in exactly the same steps, perhaps we won’t
even walk on the same road; but we shan’t keep coming into
direct collision with one another.
[He then presents a set of feeble examples in support of
the general thesis that extremes lead to opposite extremes,
in the natural world and also—he adds—in the civil world—
where ‘power produces licence, and licence produces power;
bigots make atheists, and atheists make bigots’. The threat
is that if the success of the minute philosophy leads to lax
government and great licentiousness, there will be a reaction
taking the country to the opposite extreme of something
like what we might call ‘fascism’. Euphranor then launches
into ‘another worry that I have about the tendency of your
opinions’. It is than an England cleansed of Protestant
Christianity would create a spiritual vacuum (not his phrase)
that would be filled by many subtle and effective covert
34
Alciphron George Berkeley Second dialogue
missionaries for Roman Catholicism. Lysicles replies that
the minute philosophers don’t prefer any religion to any
other, and that if Roman Catholicism became the enforced
orthodoxy of England they would all go along with it. And
what about their minute philosophy? ‘Oh! we should have
more than ever of that, for we should keep it all to ourselves.’
Crito remarks that the minute philosophers tend to make
friends of the Jesuits, ignorantly unaware that the Jesuits
are subtle and sophisticated enough to ‘make dupes of the
minute philosophers’. Then:]
Here Crito paused and fixed his eyes on Alciphron, who
during this whole conversation had sat thoughtful and attentive,
without saying a word, sometimes seeming dissatisfied
at what Lysicles advanced, at other times apparently serene
and pleased, as though approving some better thought of
his own. But the day was now far advanced, and Alciphron
proposed to adjourn the argument till the following day.
‘Then’, he said, ‘I shall put matters on a new foundation,
and in a light that is so full and clear that I am sure it
will give entire satisfaction.’ So we switched to talk about
other things, ate our picnic meal, strolled on the beach, and
returned to Crito’s home in the cool of the evening.
35
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
Third dialogue (Wednesday)
1. The following day, as we sat around the tea-table in a
summer parlour facing the garden, Alciphron turned down
his cup, sat back in his chair, and said:
‘Our sect is the only one on earth that has the special
privilege of not being tied down by any principles. While
other philosophers declare themselves to be committed to
certain doctrines, ours assert a noble freedom—differing
from one another, and often a single philosopher differing
from himself. Among its other advantages, this method of
proceeding makes us of all men the hardest to refute. You
may show a particular tenet of ours to be wrong, but this
affects only those who maintain that thesis, and only for as
long as they maintain it. Some free-thinkers dogmatize more
than others do, and on some points more than on others.
The doctrine of the usefulness of vice is something we are
not all agreed on. •Some of us are great admirers of virtue.
•Others have problems regarding vice and virtue. Speaking
for myself: •I think that the doctrine maintained yesterday by
Lysicles is an ingenious bit of theory; but for various reasons
I’m inclined not to accept it, and rather to join the ‘virtue’
side in that debate. That puts me in the company of a very
small part of our sect, but it may be the most thoughtful and
praiseworthy part of it. Anyway, after looking into it fairly
and very carefully, I think that we ought to prefer virtue to
vice, and that in doing so we would be doing good things for
the public and for the reputation of our philosophers.
‘So you should know that a number of free-thinkers—men
who haven’t a grain of religion in their make-up—are men
of the most scrupulous honour, which makes them men of
virtue. Honour is a noble unpolluted source of virtue, with
absolutely no fear, self-interest or superstition mixed in with
it. It has all the advantages of religion with none of the
drawbacks. . . .’
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) So honour is the
source of virtue. (ii) A thing can’t be the source of itself. (iii)
So the source has to be distinguished from whatever it is the
source of. (iv) So honour is one thing and virtue is another?
Alciphron: I agree: virtuous actions are the effect, and
honour is their source or cause.
Euphranor: Tell me now, ·what the role of honour is in this·.
Is honour
•the will that produces the virtuous actions ·as their
efficient cause·? or
•the final cause for which they are produced; or
•right reason that governs and controls them, or
•what the actions are about,
or do you use ‘honour’ to stand for
•a faculty or appetite?
Each of these is supposed to be in one way or another a
source of human actions.
Alciphron: Honour is none of them.
Euphranor: Then please give me some notion or definition of
it.
Alciphron thought for a while and then answered that he
defined honour to be a principle of virtuous actions.
Euphranor replied: ‘As I understand it, the word “principle”
has several senses. (a) Sometimes by “principles” we
mean the parts of which a whole is composed, and into which
it can be resolved ·or analysed·. It’s in this sense that the
elements are called “principles” of compound bodies, and
words and syllables and letters are the “principles” of speech.
36
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
(b) Sometimes by “principle” we mean a small individual
seed, the growth or gradual unfolding of which produces
an organic body, animal or vegetable, in its proper size
and shape. (c) Principles in other contexts are supposed
to be certain fundamental theorems in arts and sciences,
in religion and politics. Now, when you say “Honour is a
principle of virtue”, in which (if any) of these sense are you
using “principle”?’
Alciphron replied that he didn’t mean it in any of those
senses, and that he defined ‘honour’ to be a certain ardour or
enthusiasm that glowed in the breast of a gallant man. [At that
time, ‘enthusiasm’ tended to mean something close to ‘fanaticism’, which
sometimes replaces it in this version. In the present context, however, it
is safer to let the word stand.]
Euphranor remarked that it is always legitimate to put a
definition in place of the term defined. ‘Is this allowed?’ he
asked.
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: Then can’t we say that a man of honour is an
ardent ·or heated· man, or an enthusiast?
Alciphron replied that there’s no point in such exactness,
that pedants may dispute and define but they can never
reach the high sense of honour that distinguishes the fine
gentleman. This honour, he said, was a thing to be •felt
rather than •explained.
2. Crito, seeing that Alciphron couldn’t bear being
pressed any further on that matter, and wanting to give some
satisfaction to Euphranor, said that he wouldn’t undertake
to explain such a delicate matter, but that he would repeat
to them part of a conversation he once heard between a
minute philosopher and a Christian, on the same subject.
[The reported dialogue, which is quite short, represents the
free-thinker’s ‘honour’ as a disgracefully meagre affair, pretty
much limited to paying one’s gambling debts and engaging
in duels when challenged.]
Euphranor: I don’t want the opinion of someone of whom
I know nothing. Tell me your own judgment about what
honour is, based on your own observations of men of honour.
Crito: Well, from everything that I have heard or seen, I could
never find that honour—considered as an action-stimulus
distinct from conscience, religion, reason, and virtue—was
anything but an empty name. I really do think that those
who base their conduct on the notion of ‘honour’ have less
virtue than other men; and that what they seem to have ·as
their substitute for virtue· is derived either from •the fashion
of the day or from •a conscience that has (without their
knowing it) retained faint traces of the religious principles
that were drummed into them in their childhood. These two
principles [= ‘sources’] seem to account for everything that in
those gentlemen. Men of fashion who are full of animal life
are blustering braggarts when it comes to morality; they
would blush to let anyone think that they are afraid of
conscience; they go on about ‘honour’, and want to be known
as men of honour rather than as conscientious or honest
men. But so far as I can see this shiny glow of ‘honour’, with
nothing of conscience or religion beneath it to give it life and
substance, is no better than a meteor or sunset cloud.
Euphranor: I had a confused idea that •honour had a lot to
do with •truth; and that men of honour were the greatest
enemies of all hypocrisy, falsehood and disguise.
Crito: Quite the contrary! An unbeliever who thinks he
has the most scrupulous •honour without having the least
grain of •faith or •religion will pretend to be a Christian—take
any test, join in any act of worship, kneel, pray, receive the
sacrament—all to serve his own self-interest. He won’t feel
that his honour is at stake when he solemnly declares and
37
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
promises in the face of God and the world that he will love
his wife, and forsaking all others keep only to her, while
having not the faintest intention of keeping any part of his
vow—as he shows to everyone as soon as he gets her and
her money in his power. . . .
Euphranor: We had a notion here in the country that calling
a ‘man of honour’ a liar was the nastiest thing one could do,
and a very risky thing to do!
Crito: That is very true. Such a man doesn’t mind lying, but
he hates to be called a liar.
3. Alciphron, having peacefully heard all this, said:
‘The term “free-thinker” covers men of very different
sorts and sentiments, so that free-thinkers can’t be said
strictly to constitute a single sect with a particular system
of positive and distinct opinions. We do indeed all agree on
certain points of unbelief, certain negative principles, and
this agreement does in a way bring us together under the
common idea of one sect. But those negative principles, as
they take root in men who differ in age, temperament and
upbringing, produce a wide variety of tendencies, opinions
and characters. Don’t think that our greatest strength lies
in the libertines and mere “men of honour” who constitute
the majority of us. No: we have among us philosophers of
a very different type, enquiring thinkers who are governed
not by •such crude things as sense and custom but by
•highly principled virtue and elevated morals—and the less
religious they are, the more virtuous! An unbeliever is the
best qualified person for virtue of the high and disinterested
[= ‘not self -interested’] kind, because it is a low-down and selfish
thing to be virtuous through fear or hope, ·as believers are·.
The notion of a God who maintains a future state of rewards
and punishments may indeed tempt or scare cowardly men
into •behaviour that is contrary to the natural tendency of
their souls, but it will never produce •genuine virtue. To get
to the bottom of things, to analyse virtue into its ultimate
elements and settle a scheme of morals on its true basis,
you have to grasp that an idea of beauty is natural to the
mind of man. All men want beauty; they are pleased and
delighted with it for its own sake, purely from an instinct of
nature. A man doesn’t need arguments to make him identify
and approve what is beautiful; it strikes him at first sight,
and attracts him without a reason. And just as this beauty
is found in the physical features of material things, so also
there’s a different though analogous kind of beauty—an
order, a symmetry, a handsomeness—in the moral world.
And just as the eye perceives one sort of beauty, so does the
mind by a certain interior sense perceive the other sort; and
this sense, talent or faculty is always sharpest and purest in
the noblest minds. . . . Just as we unhesitatingly pronounce
a dress to be fine, or a physical movement graceful, we
can with the same free untutored judgment tell straight off
whether someone’s behaviour is beautiful. To detect and
enjoy this kind of beauty you need a delicate and fine taste;
but when someone has this natural taste, that’s all he needs.
He has no need for anything else as a principle to convince
him ·of the value of beauty·, or as a motive to induce him
to love virtue. And every rational creature has something of
this taste or sense, though in varying degrees. All rational
beings are by nature social. They are drawn towards one
another by natural affections. They unite into families, clubs,
parties, and commonwealths by mutual sympathy. Just
as the various parts of our body (guided by the sensitive
soul) contribute to our animal functions, and are connected
to make one whole ·organism·, so also the various parts
of these rational systems (guided by this moral or interior
sense) are held together, have a fellow feeling, do support and
protect each other, and jointly co-operate towards a single
38
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
end. That’s the source of our joy in society, our inclination
towards doing good to our kind, the approval and delight
we have when we see other men’s virtuous deeds or think
back on our own. By thinking about the fitness and order
of the parts of a moral system, operating regularly and held
together by benevolent affections, the mind of man achieves
the highest notion of beauty, excellence, and perfection. Held
by this sublime idea, our philosophers infinitely despise and
pity anyone who proposes or accepts any other motive to
virtue. Self-interest is a low-down and ungenerous thing,
destroying the merit of virtue; and falsehood of every kind is
inconsistent with the genuine spirit of philosophy.’
Crito: So your love for moral beauty, and your passion
for truth as such, won’t let you patiently endure those
fraudulent impositions upon mankind—
•God, •the immortality of the soul, and •rewards and
punishments in an after-life—
which purport to promote virtue but really destroy it (destroy
true virtue); and at the same time contradict and belittle your
noble theories, thus tending to disturb and agitate men’s
minds and fill them with doomed hopes and empty terrors.
Alciphron: Men’s first thoughts and natural notions are the
best in moral matters. Mankind doesn’t need to be preached
or reasoned or frightened into virtue, which is such a natural
and congenial thing for every human soul. And if this is
the case—as it certainly is—it follows that all society’s aims
are secured without religion, and that an unbeliever offers
promise of being the most virtuous man, in a true, sublime,
and heroic sense.
4. Euphranor: While you say these things, Alciphron, I
feel a state of my soul like the trembling of one lute when
the unison strings of another are plucked. Doubtless there
is a beauty of the mind, a charm in virtue, a symmetry
and proportion in the moral world. The ancients knew this
moral beauty by the name of honestum. If we want to know
what its force and influence are, it may be worthwhile to
inquire how it was understood and depicted by those who
first considered it, and gave it a name. Honestum, according
to Aristotle, is what is •praiseworthy; according to Plato it
is what is •pleasant or •profitable—meaning pleasant to a
reasonable mind and profitable to its true interest. [Euphranor
gives the key words here in Greek as well as in English or, in one case
(honestum), Latin.] [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) When we think of
an action as praiseworthy, our thought goes beyond the bare
action itself, and takes in the opinion of others concerning it.
(ii) So this isn’t a sufficient basis or source of virtue for a man
to act on, in a case where he thinks that his conduct can’t
be observed by any other thinking being. (iii) When a man
does something because he finds it pleasant or profitable, we
have to think that he’ll refrain from doing it—or even do its
opposite—if that has a prospect of greater pleasure or profit.
(iv) So it follows from this that the beauty of virtue in either
Aristotle’s or Plato’s sense is not sufficient to get sensual and
worldly-minded men to act virtuously. (v) So it follows that
hope of reward and fear of punishment are extremely useful
in getting the balance of pleasant and profitable to swing
down on the side of virtue, thus bringing much benefit to
human society.
Alciphron appealed: ‘Gentlemen, you are witnesses of this
unfair proceeding of Euphranor’s, who argues against us on
the basis of Plato’s and Aristotle’s accounts of the beauty of
virtue, accounts that have nothing to do with our views. The
philosophers of our sect rise above all praise, pleasure and
self-interest when they are captured and bowled over by the
sublime idea of the beauty of virtue.’
‘I apologise’, replied Euphranor, ‘for supposing that today’s
minute philosophers think like those ancient sages.
39
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
But tell me, Alciphron, since you don’t adopt Plato’s or
Aristotle’s account of it, what do you understand the beauty
of virtue to be? Define it, explain it, make me understand
your meaning, that so we can argue about the same thing; if
we don’t do that we’ll never reach a conclusion.’
5. Alciphron: Some things are better understood by
definitions and descriptions; but I have always observed that
those who do least well concerning the beauty of virtue are
those who try to define, explain, and dispute about it. Moral
beauty is so unique and abstract, so subtle, fine, and fleeting,
that it doesn’t survive being handled and inspected like a jug
or a boot. So you’ll have to allow me my philosophic liberty
to •take my stand within the general and indefinite sense;
rather than •entering into a precise and detailed account of
this beauty, possibly •losing sight of it, and also possibly
•giving you leverage for criticizing and inferring and raising
doubts, queries and difficulties about something that’s as
clear as the sun when nobody reasons upon it!
Euphranor: Are you then saying, Alciphron, that the notion
of moral beauty is clearest when it is not thought about?
Alciphron: I say that it’s something to be felt rather than
understood, a certain je ne sais quoi [French = ‘I don’t know
what’]. We engage with it not through our concept-managing
capacities, but through a special sense, which is properly
called the ‘moral sense’ because it is adapted to the perception
of moral beauty, as the eye is adapted to colours, or the
ear to sounds.
Euphranor: I have no doubt that men naturally have certain
instinctive sensations or emotions that make them amiable
and useful to each other. Examples are:
•fellow-feeling with the distressed,
• tenderness for our offspring,
•affection towards our friends, our neighbours and our
country,
•indignation against what is base, cruel or unjust.
These emotions are implanted in the human soul along with
various other factors—fears and appetites, aversions and
desires—with different minds differing in which of these are
strongest and uppermost. Doesn’t it then seem to be a very
uncertain guide in morals, for a man to follow his emotion or
inward feeling? If this were the general rule, wouldn’t it be
sure to lead different men in different directions, depending
on which appetite or emotion was prevalent?
Alciphron: I don’t deny that.
Euphranor: And doesn’t it also follow that duty and virtue
are more likely to be practised if men are led by reason and
judgment, balancing •low and sensual pleasures against
•those of a higher kind, •present losses against •future gains,
and the •discomfort and disgust of every vice against •the
delightful practice of the opposite virtue and the pleasing
thoughts and hopes that go with it? Or can there be a
stronger motive to virtue than the belief that all things
considered it is in every man’s true self-interest?
6. Alciphron: I tell you, Euphranor, we despise the ‘virtue’
of the man who calculates and deliberates and must have a
reason for being virtuous. The refined moralists among the
free-thinkers are enchanted and carried away by the abstract
beauty of virtue. They. . . .love virtue only for its own sake. . . .
Try an experiment on the first man you meet. Propose to
him a villainous or unjust action. Get his initial sense of the
matter and you’ll find that he detests it. He may indeed later
on be misled by arguments or overpowered by temptation;
but his original, unpremeditated, genuine thoughts are right
and orthodox. How can we account for this except through a
moral sense which, when left to itself, has as quick and true
40
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
a perception of the beauty and ugliness of human actions as
the eye has of colours?
Euphranor: Mightn’t this be adequately explained in terms
of conscience, affection, emotion, education, reason, custom,
religion? For all I know, those sources of moral behaviour
may be what you •metaphorically call a moral sense!
Alciphron: What I call a ‘moral sense’ is strictly, •literally,
and truly a sense, and is different in kind from all the things
you have just listed. All men have it, though some may fail
to be aware of it in themselves.
Euphranor smiled and said: ‘Alciphron has made discoveries
where I least expected him to. In regard to •everything
else I would hope to learn from him, but for knowledge of
•myself, of the faculties and powers of my own mind, I would
have looked at home! And I might have looked there for a
good long time without finding this new talent. Even now,
after being tutored, I still can’t understand it. I must say that
Alciphron speaks in a way that is too high-flown and obscure
for a topic that ought to be the most clearly understood of
all. I have often heard that your •deepest experts and •oldest
and •most experienced theoreticians are the •most obscure!
Lysicles is young, and speaks plainly. If he would favour
us with his view of the ‘moral sense’, that might perhaps be
nearer to a level at which I can understand.’
7. Lysicles shook his head, and in a solemn and earnest
manner addressed us all. ‘Gentlemen,’ he said, ‘Alciphron
stands on his own legs. I have no part in these refined
notions he is now committed to defending. If I must •subdue
my emotions, •take things in an abstract way, •think deeply,
•love virtue—in short, if I must be an enthusiast—the deference
I owe to the laws of my country make me choose to
be an enthusiast in their way! Besides, it is better to be an
enthusiast for some end than to be an enthusiast for none.
This doctrine ·of virtue based not on religion but on a “moral
sense”· has all the solid inconveniences of the Christian
doctrine, without its distracting hopes and prospects.’
Alciphron: I wasn’t counting on Lysicles to back me up in
this matter, which after all doesn’t need his help. Different
topics require different treatments. A subject may be too
obscure for the dry and pedantic method of definition and
distinction-drawing, or it may be too simple for it. And we
may know too little about a subject to be able to make it
plainer by talking about it, or we may know too much for
further talk to be any help.
Crito: . . . .For my part, I believe that if matters were fairly
stated,
the rational satisfaction, the peace of mind, the inward
comfort and conscientious joy that a good Christian
finds in good actions,
would not be found to fall short of all
the ecstasy, rapture and enthusiasm that are
supposed to come from that high and undescribed
source, ·the moral sense·.
Seriously, can any ecstasy be higher, any rapture more
affecting, than what comes from the love of God and man,
from a conscience clear of sins, from an inward discharge of
duty, with the secret delight, trust and hope that go along
with it?
Alciphron: O Euphranor, we who are devoted to the truth
don’t •envy the groundless joys and mistaken hopes of
a Christian—we •pity them!. And as for conscience and
rational pleasure, how can we allow a conscience without
allowing a vindictive God? And how can we suppose that
the charm of virtue consists in any pleasure or benefit that
comes from virtuous actions, without thereby giving great
advantages to the Christian religion, which seems to arouse
41
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
its believers to virtue by the self-interested pursuit of the
highest pleasures as rewards? Alas! if we granted this, we
would be opening the door to all those rusty old speeches
about the necessity and usefulness of the great articles of
faith, the immortality of the soul, an after-life, rewards and
punishments, and other such exploded notions. According
to our system and principles, those factors may perhaps
produce a low, popular, self-interested kind of ‘virtue’, but
it is bound to destroy and extinguish virtue in the sublime
and heroic sense ·of the word·.
8. Euphranor: What you’re saying now is perfectly intelligible:
I wish I understood your main principle as well.
Alciphron: So you are seriously at a loss? Can you really
have no notion of beauty, or have it but not know beauty to
be lovable in itself and for itself?
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, do all mankind have the
same notion of a beautiful face?
Alciphron: The physical beauty of human beings seems to
be rather mixed and various. . . . But isn’t there a steady
standard of beauty with regard to other things? Doesn’t
every human mind have the idea of order, harmony and
proportion?
Euphranor: O Alciphron, it’s a weakness of mine that I tend
to get lost when the talk is abstract and general; particular
things are better suited to my faculties. So let us stay with
the objects of the senses, and try to discover what it is that
makes them beautiful; and then, using these sensible things
as a ladder, climb to the level of moral and intellectual beauty.
So please tell me: what is it that we call ‘beauty’ in the objects
of sense? [Alciphron’s answer would, as Euphranor points
out, allow for ‘beauty’ in tastes and smells; so he tries again
with an account that limits beauty to what can be seen:]
Alciphron, after a short pause, said that beauty consisted
in a certain symmetry or proportion pleasing to the eye.
Euphranor: Is this proportion the very same in everything, or
is it different in different kinds of things?
Alciphron: Different, doubtless. The proportions of an ox
would not be beautiful in a horse. And we see also in
inanimate things that the beauty of a table, a chair, a door,
consists in different proportions.
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) This proportion implies
the relation of one thing to another. (ii) And these relations
are based on size and shape. (iii) For the proportions to
be right, those mutual relations of size and shape in the
parts must be such as to make the whole thing complete
and perfect in its kind. (iv) A thing is said to be ‘perfect in
its kind’ when it fits the purpose for which it was made. (v)
So the parts have to be related, and adjusted to one another,
in such a way that they can best work together to make
the whole thing work properly. (vi) But comparing parts
with one another, viewing them as belonging to one whole,
and relating this whole to its use or purpose, seems to be
the work of reason. (vii) So strictly speaking, proportions
are not perceived by the sense of sight, but only by reason
through the means of sight. (viii) So beauty, in your sense
of it, is an object not of the eye but of the mind. (ix) So the
eye alone can’t see that a chair is handsome, or a door well
proportioned.
Alciphron: That seems to follow, but I’m not clear on this
point.
Euphranor: Let’s see if there’s any difficulty in it. That chair
you are sitting in: do you think it could be regarded as
well-proportioned or handsome if it didn’t have that height,
depth, breadth, and wasn’t adjusted so as to be comfortable
to sit in?
Alciphron: It could not.
42
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
Euphranor: So the beauty or symmetry of a chair can’t be
taken in unless you know what the chair is for, and relate
its shape to that intended use; and that can’t be done by the
•eye alone—it’s work for the •judgment. So it is one thing to
see an object and another to detect its beauty.
Alciphron: I admit this to be true.
9. Euphranor: [He now repeats the point with the example
of a door: the standards for what makes a door ‘beautifully
proportioned’ reflect the fact that doors are for humans to go
through. Alciphron agrees. Then:] Tell me, Alciphron, isn’t
there something truly decent and beautiful in dress?
Alciphron: No doubt there is.
Euphranor: If we want to get an idea of beauty in dress, is
anyone more likely to give it to us than painters and sculptors
whose business it is to aim at graceful representations?
Alciphron: I believe not.
Euphranor: Well, then, let’s examine the draperies of the
great masters in these arts for example how they were
accustomed to clothe a matron, or a man of rank. [He then
launches into a fierce attack on current standards of dress.
The Greeks and Romans dressed themselves in a ‘becoming’
manner, whereas ‘our Gothic gentry’ have adopted standards
and fashions that are ‘absurd and ridiculous’. The reason
for this (and Alciphron agrees) is that ‘instead of consulting
use, reason and convenience’ the moderns have gone in for
‘fancy, the unnatural parent of monsters’. He concludes
that ‘the beauty of dress depends on its serving certain ends
and uses’. Euphranor then launches into a fresh set of
examples, quoting Virgil on a beautiful •horse, and then
reporting ancient Greek ideas about what makes a •pillar
beautiful. There follows a long speech about architectural
standards, all of which is aimed at showing ‘the subordinate
relative nature of beauty’. Architectural beauty, he says,
reflects not only •the use to which the building is to be put,
but also •certain relationships to natural things—e.g. the
proportions that make for beauty in a Greek pillar have
a definite relationship to the proportions of a well-shaped
human body. Euphranor sums up:] The grand distinction
between •ancient Greek and •Gothic architecture is that the
•Gothic is fantastical, and mostly not based on nature or
reason, necessity or use, these being what account for all the
beauty, grace and ornament of the architecture of •ancient
Greece.
Crito: What Euphranor has said confirms the opinion I
always entertained, that the rules of architecture (as of all
other arts that flourished among the Greeks) were based
on truth and nature and good sense. [He then expounds
the point that the ancients didn’t adhere slavishly to their
rules of proportion etc., being willing to depart from them
‘whenever the particular distance, position, elevation, or dimension
of the building or its parts seemed to require it’. He
contrasts •careful and rational departure from rules with the
•capricious fantasticalness of contemporary architecture.]
Alciphron: Now I need something to be made clearer—namely
what the point is of this architectural detour.
Euphranor: Weren’t we enquiring into beauty?
Alciphron: We were.
Euphranor: Well, what do you think, Alciphron—doesn’t
some real principle of beauty have to be at work when
something pleases us here and now and also gave pleasure
two thousand years ago and two thousand miles away?
Alciphron: Yes, it does.
Euphranor: And isn’t that how things stand with respect to
a sound piece of architecture?
Alciphron: Nobody denies it.
43
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
Euphranor: Architecture, the noble offspring of judgment
and fancy, was gradually formed in the most civilised and
informed countries of Asia, and in Egypt, Greece and Italy. It
was valued and admired by the most flourishing states and
most renowned monarchs, who at vast expense improved it
and brought it to perfection. It seems more than any other art
to be specially involved with order, proportion and symmetry.
So isn’t it reasonable for us to think that architecture is the
art that is most likely to help us get some rational notion
of the je ne sais quoi in beauty? And haven’t we learned
from our ‘detour’ that •there is no beauty without proportion,
and that •proportions are to be judged as sound and true
only to the extent that they relate ·appropriately· to some
certain use or purpose—this potential usefulness being what
basically makes them please and charm?
Alciphron: I admit all this to be true.
[In the next three speeches, ‘principle’ is used in a sense related to
(b) in Euphranor’s speech on pages 36–37. Think of it as meaning
approximately ‘generator’ or ‘source of energy’.]
10. Euphranor: Given this doctrine, I’d like to know what
beauty can be found in a moral system that has been formed,
tied together and governed by •chance, •fate, or any other
•blind unthinking principle. Without •thought there can be
no purpose or design; without •a purpose there can’t be any
usefulness; and without •usefulness there can’t be any of
the fitness of proportion from which beauty springs.
Alciphron: Can’t we suppose that the world is permeated
throughout by a certain vital principle of beauty, order and
harmony, •without supposing a God who inspects, punishes
and rewards the moral actions of men, •without supposing
the immortality of the soul or an after-life—in brief •without
accepting any part of what is commonly called faith, worship,
and religion?
Crito: Is this principle that you are supposing a thinking one
or not? If not, then it is all of a piece with chance or fate,
which was argued against a moment ago. If it does think,
then I’d like Alciphron to tell me: What is so beautiful in
a moral system headed by a supreme thinking being that
doesn’t protect the innocent, punish the wicked, or reward
the virtuous? [He goes on eloquently and at length about
‘the beauty of a moral system’ in which everyone sees himself
as ‘the member of a great City, whose author and founder is
God’, and where all conduct aims at ‘the noblest end, namely
the complete happiness or well-being of the whole’. Then:]
11. There will be great beauty in a system of spirits
that are subordinate to God’s will and under his direction,
with him governing them by laws, and directing them by
methods, that are suitable to wise and good ends. But how
can there be beauty in an incoherent system that is governed
by chance, or in a blind system that is governed by fate, or
in any system where God doesn’t preside? Where there is
no thought there is no •design, and therefore no •order, and
therefore no •beauty. Contrast these two scenes:
A man is conscious that his will is inwardly conformed
to God’s will, which produces order and harmony in
the universe and conducts the whole by the most just
methods to the best end.
That gives a beautiful idea. But then:
A man is conscious that his virtue is overlooked,
neglected or held against him by men and not
regarded or rewarded by God, that this world has
treated him badly and he has no hope or prospect of
being better treated in another world.
Where’s the beauty in that? What pleasure can we get from
thinking about it? And how could any sane person think
that spreading this idea ·of our moral situation· is the way to
spread or propagate virtue in the world?. . . . An enthusiast
44
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
may entertain himself with visions and fine talk about such
a system; but when it comes to be considered by careful
thinkers with cool heads, I don’t think they will find any
beauty or perfection in it; and they won’t think that such a
moral system can possibly be the work of the same ·divine·
hand as the natural world, throughout which there shines
so much order, harmony and proportion.
Alciphron: All this serves to confirm me in my opinion. I
said earlier [page 39] that regarding this high-level beauty of
morality a man’s first thoughts are best, and that we’ll risk
losing sight of it if we examine, inspect and reason about it.
That there is such a thing can’t be doubted when we realize
that some of our philosophers today have a high sense of
virtue without the least notion of religion. That is a clear
proof of the usefulness and effectiveness of our principles!
12. Crito: Granting that some minute philosophers are
virtuous, we may venture to question the cause of their
virtue. You attribute it to an inexplicable enthusiastic
notion of moral beauty; I think it comes, as Euphranor
said, from personal temperament, custom, and religious
education. But anyway, assign what beauty you please to
virtue in an irreligious system, it can’t be less in a religious
one, unless you hold that virtue’s charms diminish as her
dowry increases! Take all the motives of every sort that
an unbeliever can possibly get from the beauty of virtue, a
believer can have them too, as well as other motives that
an unbeliever doesn’t have. So it is obvious that those
of your sect who have moral virtue don’t get it from their
special free-thinking doctrines, which serve only to lessen
the motives to virtue. Good free-thinkers are less good, and
bad ones are more bad, than they would have been if they
were believers.
Euphranor: It seems to me that those heroic unbelieving
lovers of abstract ·moral· beauty are much to be pitied, and
much to be amazed by.
Lysicles broke in impatiently: ‘Gentlemen,’ he said, ‘you
shall have my whole thoughts about this topic, plain and
unvarnished. Everything that is said about a “moral sense”
or about “moral beauty” in any meaning of that phrase,
whether said by Alciphron or Euphranor or anyone else, I
regard as basically mere window-dressing and pretence. The
“beautiful” and the “decent” are outward things, and are
relative and superficial. They have no effect in the dark, ·as
they would if there were something solid about them·. They
are merely show-pieces to argue over and make speeches
about, as some of the self-announced members our sect are
accustomed to doing (orthodox though they are about other
things). But if one of them got into power, you wouldn’t find
him such a fool as Euphranor imagines. He would soon
show that he had learned
•that the love of one’s country is a prejudice,
•that mankind are rogues and hypocrites, and that it
would be folly to sacrifice oneself for the sake of the
likes of them,
•that everything that matters relates to this life, and
•that because to every man ‘this life’ means his own
life, it clearly follows that charity begins at home.
Claims are made of benevolence to mankind, but what wise
people put into practice is benevolence to themselves. Among
our free-thinker philosophers, the livelier ones don’t hesitate
to accept these maxims openly; and as for the more solemn
ones, we can guess what they must really think if they are
true to their principles!’
Crito: Whatever effect pure theory may have on certain
minority of very unusual minds, or in some other parts of
the world, I really do think •that in England now reason,
45
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
religion and law are all together little enough to get people to
act in accordance with their consciences; and •that it would
be downright stupid to think that without reason, religion
and law men would be in love with the golden mean, ·i.e. in
love with a temperate way of life, one in which extremes are
avoided·. Indeed, my countrymen may be even less inclined
to be like that than others are, because in the make-up of an
English mind there is a certain hot eagerness that carries us
to the sad extreme—in religion to fanaticism, in free-thinking
to atheism, in liberty to rebellion. [He goes on to say that the
English, like ‘other northern people’, don’t go in for beauty
much, and when they try they make a hash of it. Winding
up:] But in no case is it to be hoped that the beautiful [he says
it in Greek] will be the leading idea of the great majority, who
have quick senses, strong emotions, and blunt intellects.
13. Alciphron: The fewer they are, the more we should
respect and admire such philosophers, whose souls are
transported by this sublime idea ·of moral beauty·.
Crito: But then one might expect from such philosophers
enough good sense and philanthropy to make them keep
their tenets to themselves, and consider the situation of their
weak brethren, who are more strongly affected by notions of
another kind than that of the beauty of pure disinterested
virtue. Consider the example of Cratylus. [What follows is aimed
at the third Earl of Shaftesbury, who is Berkeley’s target—not always
fairly treated—through much of this work.] He
•was prejudiced against the Christian religion,
•was of an unsound constitution,
•had a rank ·in society· higher than most men can
even aim at,
•had a fortune equal to his rank,
•had little capacity for sensual vices, or temptation to
dishonest ones.
He talked himself (or thought he had!) into a Stoic enthusiasm
about the beauty of virtue. Then, under the pretence of
making men •heroically virtuous, he tried ·by undermining
religion· to destroy the means of making them •reasonably
and humanly so. This is a clear example of the fact that
neither birth, nor books, nor conversation can introduce a
knowledge of the world into a conceited mind that will attend
only to itself and look at mankind only in its own mirror!
Alciphron: Cratylus was a lover of liberty and of his country.
He aimed to make men uncorrupt and virtuous on the purest
and most disinterested principles.
Crito: It’s true that the main aim of all his writings (as
he himself tells us) was to assert the reality of a beauty
and charm in moral subjects as well as in natural ones;
to demonstrate a •taste that he thinks more effective than
•principle; to recommend •morals on the same basis as
•manners, and in this way to make progress in ·moral·
philosophy by giving it the same basis as the notions of what
is agreeable and socially acceptable. As for religious qualms,
the belief in an after-life of rewards and punishments, and
such matters, this great man doesn’t hesitate to declare
that the liberal, polished, and refined part of mankind must
consider them only as children’s tales and pastimes of the
vulgar. So for the sake of the better sort of people he has,
in his great goodness and wisdom, thought of something
else, namely a taste or flavour! This, he assures us, is
something that will influence people, because (according to
him) anyone who has any impression of ‘gentility’ or polish is
so acquainted with the fittingness and grace of things as to
be easily bowled over by the thought of it. His conduct seems
to be about as wise as that of a monarch who announces
that in his kingdom there is no jail and no executioner to
enforce the laws, but that it is beautiful to obey the laws,
46
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
and that in doing so men will taste the pure delight that
results from order and decorum.
Alciphron: Yet isn’t it true that certain ancient philosophers—
ones of great note—held the same opinion as Cratylus,
declaring that no-one counts as ‘a good man’ if he practises
virtue for any reason except that it is beautiful?
Crito: Yes, I think some of the ancients said things that gave
rise to this opinion. Aristotle distinguishes between two ways
in which someone can be a good man—•one he calls agathos,
or simply good, •the other he calls kalos kagathos. . . . These
are hard to translate into English, but his sense is plainly
this:
agathos is the man to whom the good things of nature
are good.
According to Aristotle, things that are vulgarly regarded
as the greatest goods—riches, honours, power, and bodily
perfections—are indeed good by nature; and yet they happen
to be hurtful and bad to some people because of their bad
habits, so that those natural goods are not good for a fool,
an unjust man, or an intemperate man, any more than a
sick man is helped by getting nourishment that is proper for
those who are in good health. And
kalos kagathos is the man in whom are to be found all
things worthy and decent and praiseworthy, purely as
such and for their own sake, and who practises virtue
solely because of his love of virtue’s innate beauty.
Aristotle also observes that there is a certain political way
of thinking and behaving that the Spartans and others had,
who thought that virtue was to be valued and practised
because of the natural advantages that come with it. This
makes them good men, he says, but they don’t have the
supreme consummate virtue. This makes it clear that
according to Aristotle someone can be a good man without
•believing that virtue its own reward, or •being moved to
virtue only by the sense of moral beauty. It’s also clear
that he distinguishes the political virtue of nations, which
the public is everywhere concerned to maintain, from this
high-minded and theoretical kind of virtue. Notice also that
his high-level kind of virtue was consistent with supposing
a Providence that inspects and rewards the virtues of the
best men. He says: ‘If the gods care at all about human
affairs, as they seem to, it seems reasonable to suppose that
•they are most delighted with the part of our nature that is
most excellent and most like their own natures, namely our
minds, and that •they will reward those who chiefly love and
cultivate what is most dear to •them.’ He remarks that the
majority of mankind are naturally inclined to be awed not by
shame but by fear, and to abstain from vicious conduct not
because of its ugliness but only because of the punishment
it brings. . . .
All this shows us very clearly what Aristotle would have
thought of those who would set to work to lessen or destroy
mankind’s hopes and fears in order to make them virtuous
purely because of the beauty of virtue.
14. Alciphron: Well, whatever Aristotle and his followers
thought, isn’t it certain that the Stoics maintained this
doctrine in its highest sense, asserting that •the beauty
of virtue is all-sufficient, that •virtue is her own reward, that
•only virtue could make a man happy despite all the things
that are vulgarly regarded as the greatest woes and miseries
of human life? And they held all this while also believing
that the soul of man is some kind of material thing, which
at death is dissipated like a flame or vapour.
Crito: Yes, the Stoics do sometimes talk as if they believed
the soul to be mortal; in dealing with this topic in one of
his letters, Seneca speaks much like a minute philosopher.
47
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
But in several other places he declares himself to have the
outright opposite opinion, asserting that men’s souls after
death rise into the heavens and look down on earth. . . .
[Crito then talks learnedly about Marcus Aurelius: he
‘sometimes speaks of the soul as perishing’ or scattering,
but for him ‘the soul’ was a rather low part of a man, to be
distinguished from his ‘mind’ or governing principle. At a
man’s death, according to him, the ‘mind’ remains intact;
it is a particle of God, which goes back, whole, to the stars
and the Divinity. Concluding:] Thus, along with all his
magnificent lessons and splendid views about the force and
beauty of virtue, Marcus is positive about the existence of
God. . . .in the strict sense of a Providence inspecting and
taking care of human affairs.
Despite their high style, therefore, the Stoics can’t be said
to have reduced every motive for living virtuously to just
one—the beauty of virtue—in such a way as to attempt to
destroy people’s belief in the immortality of the soul and a
Providence that hands out rewards and punishments. And
anyway, supposing that the disinterested Stoics. . . .did make
virtue its own and its only reward, taking this in the most
rigid and absolute sense, what does that imply for those
·of us· who are not Stoics? If we adopt all the principles
of that sect, accepting their notions of good and evil, their
famous indifference to suffering—in short, setting ourselves
up as complete Stoics—that may enable us to maintain this
doctrine ·of virtue for its own sake· with a better grace; at
least it will fit consistently into our whole ·Stoic· scheme
of things. But if you borrow this splendid patch from the
Stoics, hoping to make a big impression by inserting it into
a modern composition, spiced with the wit and notions of
the present day, you’ll make an impression all right, but on
the mind of a wise man it may not be the impression you
intended!
15. Though I must admit ·that although embroidering a
Stoic ‘patch’ with jokes ought to make you look ridiculous,
you might get away with it, because· the present age is very
indulgent to everything that aims at mockery of religion. . . .
Alciphron: Not everyone likes humorous writings, and not
everyone can produce them. . . . The truth is that the variety
in readers’ tastes requires a variety of kinds of writers. Our
sect has provided for this with great judgment. To spread our
word to people of the more serious sort, we have men who can
reason and argue deeply and well. For the run-of-the-mill
general reading public we have writers who produce lengthy
rhetorically persuasive pieces. And for men of rank and
social polish we have the finest and wittiest mockers in the
world, whose ridicule is the sure test of truth. [This refers to
Shaftesbury, who in his book Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions,
Times wrote about ‘wit and humour’ in philosophy.]
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) No doubt that ingenious
mockers are knowledgeable men. (ii) They know about
the Copernican theory of the planets, the circulation of the
blood, and so on. (iii) They believe that there is land in the far
south of the southern hemisphere, that there are mountains
on the moon, that the earth moves. (iv) If five or six centuries
ago a man had maintained these notions among the clever
wits at an English court, they would have been received with
ridicule. (v) Whereas now it would be ridiculous to ridicule
them. (vi) Yet truth was the same then as it is now. (vii) So it
seems that ridicule is not such a secure test of truth as you
gentlemen imagine.
Alciphron: One thing we do know: our mockery and sarcasm
infuriate the black tribe ·of priests and theologians·, and
that is our comfort.
Crito: Something else that it may be worthwhile for you
to know: men who are doubled over with laughter may be
48
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
applauding a piece of mockery that they’ll find contemptible
when they recover from their laughing fit. . . .
Alciphron: Well, anyway, this much is certain: our clever
men make converts by deriding the principles of religion.
And I can assure you that mockery is the most successful
and pleasing method of convincing someone. These authors
laugh men out of their religion, as ·the Latin poet· Horace
laughed them out of their vices. . . . But a bigot can’t enjoy
their wit—indeed he can’t detect it!
16. [Crito speaks slightingly of ‘wit without wisdom’,
then moves back to the centre of their topic of conversation,
citing examples from ancient Rome of good, able people
whose attitude to virtue involved their belief in an after-life
in which virtue is rewarded. Alciphron replies that these men
were ‘very well for their times’, but that they didn’t achieve
the high-level kind of virtue that ‘our modern free-thinkers’
have.]
Euphranor: So it should seem that virtue flourishes more
than ever among us?
Alciphron: It should.
Euphranor: And this abundant virtue is to be explained
by the way in which your profound writers went about
recommending it?
Alciphron: This I grant.
Euphranor: But you have admitted that enthusiastic lovers
of virtue are not a majority in your sect, but only a small
select minority.
Alciphron didn’t answer this, but Crito stepped in. ‘To
make a true estimate of the worth and growth of modern
virtue,’ he said to Euphranor, ‘what you should go by is
not the number of virtuous men but rather the quality of
their virtue. And the virtue of these refined ·free-thinking·
theorists is so pure and genuine that (1) a very little of it
goes a long way; in fact (2) it is invaluable. (3) There’s no
comparison between it and the reasonable self-interested
virtue of the English of earlier times or of the Spartans.’ [Turns
of phrase which could mean that this kind of morality is (1) very powerful
and (2) so wonderful as to be above all price and (3) incomparably better
than the morality of the Spartans etc. but which could instead mean
that (1) the less we see of it the better and (2) it is worthless and (3) is it
incomparably worse that the morality of the Spartans etc.]
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) There are diseases of
the soul as well as of the body. (ii) The diseases of the soul are
vicious habits. (iii) And just as bodily ailments are cured by
medicines, mental ailments are cured by philosophy. (iv) So
it seems that philosophy is a medicine for the soul of man. (v)
The way we judge concerning medicines, deciding which ones
to prefer, is from the effects they bring about. (vi) Suppose
that in the middle of an epidemic a new physician condemned
the known established practice, and recommended another
method of cure; and suppose that some people had plausible
things to say in support of this proposal; wouldn’t you be
inclined to let your attitude to it be governed by whatever
difference it made to the mortality figures?
Alciphron: All you are doing is creating confusion and taking
us away from our topic.
Crito: This reminds me of my friend Lamprocles, who needed
only one argument against unbelievers. ‘I have noticed’, he
told me, ‘that as unbelief grew, so did corruption of every
kind as well as new vices.’ This simple observation of a
matter of fact was enough to make him fill the minds of his
children from an early age with the principles of religion,
despite the protests of many clever men. The new theories
that our clever moderns have tried to substitute for religion
have run their full course in our times, and have produced
their effect on the minds and conduct of men. That men are
49
Alciphron George Berkeley Third dialogue
men is a sure maxim; but it’s equally sure that Englishmen
are not the same men that they were—and you don’t need
me to tell you whether they are better or worse, more or less
virtuous, than they used to be. Everyone can see and judge
that for himself. . . .
Alciphron: Whatever the consequences may be, I can never
bring myself to agree with those who measure •truth by
•convenience. The only God I worship is truth; wherever it
leads, I shall follow.
Euphranor: So you have a passion for truth?
Alciphron: Undoubtedly.
Euphranor: For all truths?
Alciphron: For all.
Euphranor: To know them or to publish them?
Alciphron: Both.
Euphranor: What!. . . . Would you busily correct the procedures
of an enemy who was going about his attack in the
wrong way? Would you help an enraged man to take out his
sword?
Alciphron: In such cases, common sense tells one how to
behave.
Euphranor: So common sense should be consulted about
whether a truth is salutary or hurtful, fit to be declared or fit
to be concealed.
Alciphron: How! you would have me conceal and stifle the
truth, and keep it to myself? Is that what you aim at?
Euphranor: I only draw an obvious conclusion from things
you say. As for myself, I don’t believe that your opinions
are true. You do, but if you are going to be consistent with
yourself you shouldn’t think it necessary or wise to publish
hurtful truths just because they are true. What service can
it do mankind to •lessen the motives to virtue? and what
harm can it do to •increase them?
Alciphron: None in the world. But I have to say that I can’t
square the accepted notions of God and providence with
my understanding, and I am just naturally revolted by the
lowness of pretending not to notice a falsehood.
Euphranor: Shall we therefore appeal to truth, and examine
the reasons that hold you back from believing in God and
providence?
Alciphron: With all my heart; but that is enough for just now.
Let’s make this the subject of our next conversation.
50
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
Fourth dialogue (Thursday)
As I looked out of my window early the next morning I
saw Alciphron walking in the garden with all the signs of a
man in deep thought. I went down to him.
‘Alciphron,’ I said, ‘this early and profound meditation
frightens me. Why? Because I would be sorry to be convinced
that there is no God. The thought of •anarchy in nature is
more shocking to me than the thought of •anarchy in civil
life, because natural concerns are more important than civil
ones, and are the basis of all the others.’
‘I grant’, replied Alciphron, ‘that some inconvenience
might follow from disproving the existence of God; but
as for what you say of ‘fright’ and ‘shocking’, all that is
nothing but prejudice, mere prejudice. Men form an idea or
fanciful picture in their own minds, and then bow down and
worship it. Notions govern mankind; but no other notion has
taken such deep root or spread so widely as the notion of
God’s governing the world. So it’s an heroic achievement by
philosophy to unthrone this imaginary monarch, and banish
all those fears and spectres that only the light of reason can
dispel. . . .’
‘It will be my role’, I said, ‘to stand by, as I have done
up to now, taking notes of everything that happens during
this memorable event—the attempt of a less than six-feet-tall
minute philosopher to dethrone the monarch of the universe!’
[They kick this around a little, and then are joined by
Euphranor and by Crito, who remarks that with Alciphron
having made such an early start, ‘we can expect to see
atheism placed in the best light, and supported by the
strongest arguments’. Then they get straight on with it,
not even finding somewhere to sit down.]
2. Alciphron: The existence of a God is a subject on which
countless commonplaces have been uttered; there’s no need
for me to repeat them. So allow me lay down certain rules
and limitations, so as to shorten this conversation. The aim
of debating is to persuade; so anything that won’t persuade
should be left out of our debate.
Here are three limitations on arguments against me. (1)
I can’t be persuaded by metaphysical arguments such as
those from •the idea of an all-perfect being, or from •the
absurdity of an infinite chain of causes. I have always found
arguments of this sort dry and thin; and, because they aren’t
suited to my way of thinking, they may puzzle me but they’ll
never convince me. (2) I can’t be persuaded by the authority
either of past ages or our present time, the ‘authority’ of
•mankind in general or of •particular wise men. None of that
counts for much with a man who argues soundly and thinks
freely. (3) Arguments based on the utility or convenience
·of the belief in God· are beside the point. They may indeed
prove the •usefulness of the •belief, but not the •existence of
the •thing. The rigorous eyes of a philosopher can see that
truth and convenience are very different things, whatever
legislators or statesmen may think.
So that I won’t seem biased, I also propose two limitations
on arguments that I can use on my side. (1) I won’t argue
from •anything that may seem irregular or unaccountable
in the works of nature to the conclusion that •nature is not
caused by infinite power and wisdom. I already know how
you would answer such an argument if I did use it, namely
by saying that no-one can judge the symmetry and use of
the parts of an infinite machine—whose appropriateness and
usefulness depends on how they relate to each other and to
51
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
the whole—without having a grasp of the entire machine, the
whole universe. (2) I undertake not to argue from •premises
about the harms that good men suffer and the prosperity
that wicked men often enjoy in this life. If I did argue in that
way, I know how you would reply: instead of admitting this
as a good argument against the existence of God, you would
make it an argument for an after-life in which rewards and
punishments will be distributed in ways that vindicate the
divine attributes and set everything right at the end. ·By
not using those arguments, I deprive you of an opportunity
to give those answers, but there is no unfairness in that·.
Even if the answers are good ones, they aren’t arguments
for the existence of God. All they do is to solve certain
difficulties that might be brought against the existence of
God, on the assumption that it had already been proved by
proper arguments.—I thought I should specify all this so as
to save us all time and trouble.
Crito: What we should be aiming at here is the discovery
and defence of truth; and truth may be justified not only
by persuading its adversaries but also—if they can’t be
persuaded—by showing them to be unreasonable. So an
argument that sheds light will have its effect, even against
an opponent who shuts his eyes, because it will show him to
be obstinate and prejudiced. Anyway, •minute philosophers
are less attentive than anyone to this distinction between
arguments that puzzle and arguments that convince; so the
distinction needn’t be respected by others in •their favour.
But Euphranor may be willing to encounter you on your own
terms, in which case I have nothing more to say.
3. Euphranor: Alciphron acts like a skillful general who
works to get the advantage of the ground and entice the
enemy to come out of their trenches! We who believe in a God
are entrenched in tradition, custom, authority, and law. But
Alciphron does not try to dislodge us; instead he proposes
that we should voluntarily abandon these entrenchments
and attack him; when we could easily and securely act on the
defensive, leaving him the trouble to dispossess us of what
we need not resign. The reasons that you have mustered up
in your early-morning meditation (he continued, addressing
Alciphron), if they don’t weaken our belief in a God, must
help to strengthen it; for the utmost is to be expected from
such a great a master in his profession when he really gets
to work on something.
Alciphron: I regard the confused notion of a Deity or
·supreme· invisible power to be the most unconquerable
of all prejudices. When half a dozen able men get together
over a glass of wine in a well lighted room, we easily banish
all the spectres of imagination or upbringing, and are very
clear about what we think and why. But as I was taking
a solitary walk before it was broad daylight this morning,
the issue seemed not quite so clear; and I couldn’t bring to
mind the force of the arguments that have usually appeared
so conclusive at other times. I experienced a strange kind
of awe, and seemed haunted by a sort of panic, which I
can’t account for except by supposing it to be the effect of
prejudice. You see, I like the rest of the world was once,
a long time ago, drilled and tutored into the belief in a
God. There is no surer mark of prejudice than believing
something without any reason. So what need is there for me
to set myself the difficult task of proving a negative, when
it is sufficient for me to point out that there is no proof
of the affirmative, and that accepting it without proof is
unreasonable? So go ahead and prove your opinion! If you
can’t, you may indeed continue to have it, but what you have
will be merely a prejudice.
Euphranor: O Alciphron! if we are to content you we must
52
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
prove, it seems, and we must do it on your terms! Well, for a
start, let us see what sort of proof you expect.
Alciphron: The sort of proof I demand (I’m not saying I expect
it!) is the sort that every intelligent man requires for any
matter of fact, or for the existence of any particular thing
other than himself. Why do I believe there is a king of Great
Britain? Because I have seen him. Or a king of Spain?
Because I have seen people who saw him. But as for this
King of Kings—I haven’t seen him myself, nor have I seen
anyone else who has seen him. If there is such a thing
as God, surely it’s very strange •that he has left himself
without a witness; •that men should still be arguing about
his existence; and •that there should be not a single evident,
sensible, plain proof of his existence without having to bring
in philosophy or metaphysics. A matter of fact has to be
proved not by notions but by facts. . . . You see what I am
up to. These are the principles on the basis of which I defy
superstition.
Euphranor: So you believe as far as you can see?
Alciphron: That is my rule of faith.
Euphranor: What! You won’t believe in the existence of things
that you •hear unless you also •see them?
Alciphron: No, that’s wrong. When I insisted on ‘seeing’, I
meant to be talking about perceiving in general. Outward
objects make very different impressions on the animal spirits,
impressions that are lumped together under the common
label ‘sense’. And whatever we can perceive by any sense
we may be sure of. [A widely accepted theory, going back at least as
far as Descartes, held that the workings of animal bodies involve ‘animal
spirits’, envisaged as extremely fine and fluid matter that can get through
holes that are too small to let even air pass through.]
4. Euphranor: So you believe that there are such things
as animal spirits?
Alciphron: Doubtless.
Euphranor: What sense do you perceive them by?
Alciphron: I don’t perceive them immediately by any of my
senses. But I am convinced of their existence because I
can infer it from their effects and operations. They are the
messengers which, running to and fro in the nerves, enable
outward objects to affect the soul.
Euphranor: So you admit the existence of a soul?
Alciphron: Provided I don’t admit an immaterial substance, I
see no drawback to allowing that there may be such a thing
as a soul. It may be no more than a thin fine texture of
super-fine parts or spirits residing in the brain.
Euphranor: I’m not asking about its nature. I only ask
•whether you accept that there is a source of thought and
action, and •whether it is perceivable by sense.
Alciphron: I grant that there is such a source, and that it isn’t
itself an object of sense; but we infer it from appearances
that are perceived by sense.
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) If I understand you
rightly, from animal functions and motions you infer the
existence of animal spirits, and from reasonable acts you
infer the existence of a reasonable soul. (ii) So it seems that
the existence of things that can’t be perceived through the
senses can be inferred from sensible effects and signs. (iii)
The soul is what makes the principal distinction between
a •real person and a •shadow, between a •living man and
a •carcass. (iv) So I can’t know that you, for instance, are
a distinct thinking individual, a living real man, except by
inferring from certain signs that you have a soul. (v) All
acts that are immediately and properly perceived by sense
come down to motion. (vi) So from motions you infer a mover
or cause; and from reasonable motions (or such as appear
calculated for a reasonable end) you infer a rational cause,
53
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
soul or spirit. (vii) Now, the soul of man drives only a small
body, an insignificant particle by comparison with the great
masses of nature, the elements, the heavenly bodies, the
system of the world. And the wisdom that appears in the
motions that are the effect of human reason is incomparably
less than the wisdom that reveals itself in the structure and
use of organized natural bodies, animal or plant. A man
can’t make with his hand a machine as admirable as the
hand itself; and none of the motions by which we trace out
human reason come anywhere near to the skill and ingenuity
of the wonderful motions of the heart, brain and other vital
parts that don’t depend on the will of man. (viii) So it follows
that from natural motions that are independent of man’s will
we can infer both power and wisdom incomparably greater
than that of the human soul. (ix) Furthermore, in natural
productions and effects there is a visible unity of plan and
design. The rules ·of nature· are fixed and immovable; the
same laws of motion apply throughout. The same in China
and here, the same two thousand years ago and today. (x)
And from the mutual respects, influences, subordinations
and uses involved in the way
•animals relate to plants,
•animals and plants relate to the elements, and
•elements relate to heavenly bodies,
we can infer that they are all parts of one whole, all working
towards the same end, and fulfilling the same design.
Alciphron: Supposing all this to be true?
Euphranor: Won’t it then follow that this vastly great—
perhaps infinite—power and wisdom must be supposed to
be in one single agent, spirit or mind? And that our certainty
of the existence of this infinitely wise and powerful spirit is
at least as clear, full and immediate as our certainty of the
existence of any one human soul apart from our own?
Alciphron: Let me think; I suspect we proceed too hastily. [Remember
that in the original Q&A version, Alciphron gave a consecutive
series of nine positive answers—‘It is’, ‘It may’, ‘I grant it is’, and so on.]
What! Do you claim that you can have the same assurance
of the existence of a God that you can have of my existence,
when you actually see me stand in front of you and talk to
you?
Euphranor: The very same assurance, if not a greater.
Alciphron: How do you support that?
Euphranor: The phrase ‘the person Alciphron’ means an
individual thinking thing, not the hair, skin, or visible
surface, or any part of the outward form, colour or shape of
Alciphron.
Alciphron: This I grant.
Euphranor: In granting that, you grant that strictly speaking
I don’t ‘see Alciphron’, i.e. that individual thinking thing,
but only visible signs and tokens that suggest and imply
the existence of that invisible source of thought, or soul.
In exactly the same way, it seems to me that though I
can’t with my physical eyes see the invisible God, I do in
the strictest sense see and perceive by all my senses the
signs and tokens, effects and operations, that suggest and
indicate and demonstrate the existence of an invisible God,
doing this as certainly, and making it at least as evident,
as any signs suggesting to me the existence of your soul,
spirit, or thinking principle. I am convinced that your soul
exists by a few signs or effects, and the movements of one
small organic body; whereas I am always and everywhere
perceiving sensible signs that point to the existence of God.
So the thesis that you doubted or denied at the outset now
seems obviously to follow from the premises. Throughout
this whole inquiry, haven’t we carefully thought about every
step we took, not moving to accept any proposition that
54
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
wasn’t clearly evident? You and I examined and assented to
each foregoing proposition, one by one; so what should we do
with the conclusion? Speaking for myself, if you don’t come
to my rescue I shall absolutely have to accept the conclusion
as true. So if I live and die as a believer in God, you’ll have
to take the blame!
6. Alciphron: I have to admit that I don’t readily find an
answer. There seems to be some foundation for what you
say. But if this matter is as clear as you claim it is, I cannot
conceive how so many able men of our sect ·of free-thinkers·
should be so much in the dark that they don’t know or
believe one syllable of it.
Euphranor: Alciphron, it’s not our present business to explain
the oversights, or vindicate the honour, of those great
men the free-thinkers, when their very existence is in danger
of being called in question.
Alciphron: How so?
Euphranor: Remember your concessions, and then show me,
if the arguments for a God are not conclusive, what better
argument you have to prove the existence of the thinking
thing which in strictness constitutes the free-thinker.
Alciphron stopped in his tracks and stood in a posture of
meditation while the rest of us continued our walk. After a
little while he re-joined us with a smiling face, like someone
who had made some discovery. ‘I have found’, he said, ‘something
that may clear up the point in dispute and completely
answer Euphranor’s challenge; I mean an argument that will
prove the existence of a free-thinker but can’t be adapted
to prove the existence of a God. This idea of yours that we
perceive the existence of God as certainly and immediately
as we do that of a human person was more than I could
swallow, though I have to admit that it puzzled me until I
had thought it through. At first I thought that a particular
•structure, •shape or •motion might be the most certain proof
of a thinking reasonable soul. But a little attention satisfied
me that •these things have no necessary connection with
reason, knowledge and wisdom. Perhaps they are certain
proofs of a •living soul, but they can’t be certain proofs of a
•thinking and reasonable one. On second thoughts and after
a minute examination of this point, I have found that nothing
so much convinces me of the existence of another person
as his speaking to me. It’s hearing you talk that is the best
strict and philosophical argument I have for your existence.
And this is a restricted argument that can’t be adapted to
your purpose; for you won’t claim that God speaks to man
in the same clear and audible way as one man speaks to
another—will you?
7. Euphranor: What! Is the impression of sound so much
more evident than that of other senses? And if it is, is the
voice of man louder than that of thunder?
Alciphron: You are missing the point. What I’m talking about
is not the sheer sound of speech, but ·language·.
We have perceptible signs that don’t resemble—and
aren’t necessarily connected with—the things they
signify; the way we use them is arbitrary ·in the
sense of being chosen by us rather than laid down
in the nature of things·; and what we use them for
is to suggest and exhibit to the minds of others an
endless variety of things that differ in nature, time
and place; thereby giving one another information,
entertainment, and direction for how to act, with
regard to near and present things and also distant
and future things.
Whether these signs are pronounced and heard, or written
and seen, they have the same use, and are equally proofs of
an intelligent, thinking, designing cause.
55
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
Euphranor: But what if it should appear that God really
speaks to man; would this content you?
Alciphron: I don’t accept stories about inward speech, holy
instincts, or indications of light or spirit. Men of good sense
regard all that as nothing. To achieve something on this
topic, you’ll need to make it plain to me that God speaks to
men by outward perceptible signs, of the same kind and in
the same way as I have defined.
Euphranor: Well, if I show it to be plainly the case that (1)
God speaks to men through arbitrary, outward, perceptible
signs that don’t resemble—and aren’t necessarily connected
with—the things they stand for and suggest; and that (2) by
countless combinations of these signs an endless variety
of things is revealed and made known to us; and that
(3) through this we are •instructed or informed about the
different natures of things, are •taught and warned about
what to avoid and what to pursue, and are •told how to
regulate our movements and how to act with respect to
things that are far off in space or in the future—will this
satisfy you?
Alciphron: It’s just the thing I’m challenging you to prove, for
it incorporates the force and use and nature of language.
8. Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) Look, Alciphron,
you can see a castle on that hill over there. (ii) It is a
long way away. (iii) A thing’s distance from oneself is a
line turned endwise to the eye. (iv) And a line in that
situation can’t project more than one single point on the
bottom of the eye. (v) So the appearance of a long distance
has the same size as the appearance of a short one; or,
rather, neither of them has any size at all, because always
what you have at the eye is a single point. (vi) It follows
from this that distance is not •immediately perceived by
the eye. (vii) So it must be perceived by the •mediation of
some other thing. (viii) To discover what this mediator—·this
intermediate item·—is, let us examine how the appearance
of an object changes as it is placed at different distances
from the eye. I find by experience that as an object is moved
further and further away from me, its visible appearance
becomes lesser and fainter; and this change of appearance
seems to be what we go by in taking in differences of distance.
(ix) But littleness or faintness don’t seem, in themselves, to
be necessarily connected with greater distance. (x) So it’s
only because of our experience that littleness and faintness
suggest ·or are signs of· distance. (x) That is to say, we
don’t perceive distance immediately; we perceive it through
the mediation of a sign that doesn’t resemble it and isn’t
necessarily connected with it, but only suggests it on the
basis of repeated experience, as words suggest things.
Alciphron: Wait a bit, Euphranor! I’ve just remembered that
writers on optics tell us of an angle that the two optic axes
make where they meet at the object being looked at; the
more obtuse this angle is, the nearer it shows the object to
be, and the more acute the angle, the further away the object
is; and this holds ·not as something arbitrary that we learn
by experience, but· as a necessary connection that can be
demonstrated.
Euphranor: So the mind discovers how far away things are
by geometry?
Alciphron: It does.
Euphranor: Wouldn’t it follow, then, that the only people who
could see are those who have learned geometry, and know
something of lines and angles?
Alciphron: There’s a sort of natural geometry that is acquired
without learning.
Euphranor: But, Alciphron, in order to construct a proof of
any kind, or deduce a conclusion from premises, don’t I have
56
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
to perceive
•how the terms are connected with one another in the
premises, and
•how the premises are connected with the conclusion?
More generally, if I am to know one thing x by means of
another thing y, don’t I first have to know y? When I perceive
your meaning by your words, don’t I have first to perceive
the words themselves? And ·in any inference· don’t I have to
know the premises before I infer the conclusion?
Alciphron: All this is true.
Euphranor: Thus, whoever infers a nearer distance from a
wider angle, or a further distance from an acuter angle, must
first perceive the angles themselves. Someone who doesn’t
perceive those angles can’t infer anything from them, can
he?
Alciphron: It is as you say.
Euphranor: Now ask the first man you meet whether he
perceives or knows anything of those optic angles? or
whether he ever thinks about them, or infers anything from
them whether by ‘natural’ or by artificial geometry. How
would you expect him to answer?
Alciphron: Candidly, I think he would answer that he knew
nothing of those matters.
Euphranor: So it can’t be true that men judge distance by
angles; and that removes all the force from your argument
to prove that distance is perceived by means of something
that has a necessary connection with it.
Alciphron: I agree with you.
9. Euphranor: It seems to me that a man can know
whether or not he perceives a thing; and if he does perceive it,
he can know whether he does this immediately or mediately;
and if he perceives it mediately, he can know whether he is
doing this by means of something like or unlike the thing,
necessarily or arbitrarily connected with it.
Alciphron: It seems so.
Euphranor: And isn’t it certain that if distance is not perceived
immediately just by itself, or by means of any image
that resembles it, or by means of any lines and angles that
have a necessary connection with it, it is perceived only by
·means of· experience.
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: From the things I have said and you have agreed
to, doesn’t it seem to follow that before a man had any
experience he wouldn’t imagine that the things he saw were
at any distance from him?
Alciphron: What? Show me!
Euphranor: The smallness or faintness of appearance, or any
other idea or sensation that doesn’t resemble distance and
isn’t necessarily connected with it, can’t suggest differences
of distance—can’t suggest anything about distance—to a
mind that hasn’t experienced a connection between those
things and distance; any more than words can suggest
notions to a man before he has learned the language.
Alciphron: I agree that that’s true.
Euphranor: Then doesn’t it follow that a man who was born
blind and was then enabled to see would, when he first
gained his sight, take the things he saw to be not •at any
distance from him but rather •in his eye, or in his mind?
Alciphron: I have to admit that this seems right. And yet I
find it hard to believe that if I were in such a state I would
think that the objects I now see at such a great a distance
were at no distance at all.
Euphranor: So you do now think that the objects of sight are
at a distance from you?
57
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
Alciphron: Certainly I do. Can anyone question that that
castle over there is at a great distance?
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, can you pick out the doors,
windows, and battlements of that same castle?
Alciphron: I can’t. At this distance it seems only a small
round tower.
Euphranor: But I have visited the castle, and I know that it’s
not a small round tower but a large square building with
battlements and turrets that you evidently don’t see.
Alciphron: What do you infer from that?
Euphranor: I infer that the object that you strictly and
properly perceive by sight is not the very same thing as
the one that is several miles distant.
Alciphron: Why so?
Euphranor: Because a little round object is one thing, and a
great square object is another. Isn’t that right?
Alciphron: I can’t deny it.
Euphranor: Tell me, isn’t the proper object of sight—·the
thing that we actually, strictly, immediately see·—the visible
appearance?
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: What do you now think about the visible
appearance of the moon up there? Isn’t it a round shining
flat thing, no bigger than a sixpence?
Alciphron: What if it is?
Euphranor: Well, tell me what you think about the moon
itself. Don’t you think of it as a vast opaque globe, with
many hills and valleys?
Alciphron: I do.
Euphranor: Then how can you think that the proper object
of your sight exists at a distance?
Alciphron: I admit that I don’t know.
Euphranor: To convince you even more, consider that crimson
cloud ·in the east·. Do you think that if you were in it
you would perceive anything like what you now see?
Alciphron: By no means. All I would see is a dark mist.
Euphranor: Isn’t it clear, then, that the castle, the moon and
the cloud that you see here are not the real castle, moon and
cloud that you suppose exist at a distance?
10. Alciphron: What am I to think, then? Do we see
anything at all, or is ·the visual side of our lives· nothing but
fancy and illusion?
Euphranor: Here is the bottom line, as I understand it. The
proper objects of sight are light and colours, with their
many hues and degrees ·of saturation and of brightness·.
These can be varied and put together in countless different
ways, forming a language that is wonderfully adapted to
indicate and exhibit to us the distances, shapes, locations,
sizes, and various qualities of tangible objects, ·ones we can
perceive through our sense of touch·. The objects of sight
don’t resemble the tangible things, nor are they necessarily
connected with them; the association of sight with touch is
due to God’s choosing it; it’s like the association between
words and the things signified by them.
Alciphron: What? Don’t we strictly speaking perceive by sight
such things as trees, houses, men, rivers, and so on?
Euphranor: We do indeed perceive or apprehend those things
by the faculty of sight. But it doesn’t follow from this they
are the proper and immediate objects of sight, any more than
that all the things that are signified by the help of ·spoken·
words or sounds are the proper and immediate objects of
hearing?
58
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
Alciphron: So you want us to think that light, shades and
colours variously combined correspond to the many articulations
of sound in language; and that by means of them
all sorts of objects are suggested to the mind through the
eye, in the same way that they are suggested by words or
sounds through the ear—i.e. not through logical inference by
the ·faculty of· judgment, and not through similarities that
are picked up by the imagination, but purely and solely from
experience, custom and habit.
Euphranor: I don’t ‘want’ you to think anything more than
the nature of things obliges you to think. I don’t want you to
submit in the least to my judgment, but only to •the force of
truth; and I doubt if even the freest thinkers will claim to be
exempt from •that constraint!
Alciphron: You have led me step by step to a place where
I am lost. But I’ll try to get out again, if not by the way I
came then by some other that I find for myself. (Short pause.
Then: )
11. Tell me, Euphranor, wouldn’t it follow from these
principles that a man who had been born blind and was
then enabled to see would at first sight not only •not perceive
how far away men and trees etc were from him, but also
•not perceive that they were men and trees? Surely this is
absurd.
Euphranor: I agree that the principles we have both accepted
do imply that such a man would never think of men, trees, or
any other objects that he had been accustomed to perceive
·only· by touch. ·At the stage of his development that we are
talking about·, his mind would be filled with new sensations
of light and colours, whose various combinations he wouldn’t
yet understand or know the meaning of; any more than a
Chinese person, on first hearing the words ‘man’ and ‘tree’,
would think of men and trees. In each case there has to
be time and experience in which repeated events would
enable him to acquire a habit of knowing how the signs are
connected with the things that are signified; i.e. to enable
him to understand the language, whether the language of
the eyes or the language of the ears. I see nothing absurd
in all this. [The phrase ‘the language of the eyes’ refers not to human
language as written down, but to God’s ‘language’ in which the visual
appearances of things inform us about their distances and their tactual
qualities.]
Alciphron: In strict philosophical truth, therefore, I see that
rock only in the sense in which I hear that rock when I hear
the word ‘rock’ being uttered.
Euphranor: In the very same sense.
Alciphron: Then why is it that •everyone will say that he sees
a rock or a house when those things are before his eyes,
whereas •nobody will say that he hears a rock or a house
when he hears ·and understands· the words ‘rock’ or ‘house’?
And a second point: if vision is only a language speaking to
the eyes, when did men learn this language? It’s a pretty
difficult task to learn the meanings of all the signs that make
up a language; but no-one will say that he has devoted time
and trouble to learning this language of vision.
Euphranor: That’s not surprising. . . . If we have been all
practising this language ever since our first entrance into the
world; if God constantly speaks to the eyes of all mankind,
even in their earliest infancy, whenever their eyes are open in
the light; it doesn’t seem to me at all strange that men aren’t
aware they ever learned a language that they began on so
early and practised so constantly as this language of vision.
Remember also that it is the same ·language· throughout
the whole world, and not differing in different places as other
languages do; so we can understand how men might mistake
the connection between •the proper objects of sight and •the
59
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
things they signify for some kind of similarity or necessary
relation; and even how they might take them to be the same
things.
[Euphranor then points out that our conscious minds
tend overlook things that we are in fact steering by, when
they are extremely familiar; for example, you’ve been reading
this page without consciously attending to the individual
letters of which the words are made up. Alciphron grumbles
that Euphranor’s points are ‘too dry and tedious for a gentleman’s
attention’; Crito snaps back at him; Alciphron replies,
trying to lower the temperature, and then ‘to cut short this
squabbling’ resumes the discussion:]
Alciphron: . . . .I put it fairly to your own conscience: Do you
really think that God himself speaks •every day and in •every
place to the eyes of •all men?
Euphranor: That is really and truly what I think; and you
should think it too, if you are consistent with yourself,
and stand by your own definition of language. You can’t
deny that the great mover and author of nature constantly
explains himself to the eyes of men, by means of perceptible
arbitrary signs that have no resemblance or ·necessary·
connection with the things signified; so that by compounding
and arranging them to suggest and exhibit an endless variety
of objects of different kinds in different times and places;
thereby informing and directing men how to act with respect
to distant and future things as well as near and present ones.
[The ‘compounding and arranging’ part of this is offered as analogous to
constructing sentences out of words. There will soon be a good deal more
about this.] These are your views as well as mine; and their
consequence is that you have as much reason to think God
speaks to your eyes as you can have for thinking that any
given person speaks to your ears.
Alciphron: I can’t help thinking that some fallacy runs
throughout this whole line of argument, though I can’t
easily put a finger on it. It seems to me that every other
sense has as good a claim as vision to be called a language.
Smells and tastes, for example, are signs that inform us of
other qualities to which they have neither resemblance nor
necessary connection.
Euphranor: Certainly, they are signs. There is a general
concept of sign that covers the parts of language as well as
all those other signs. But equally certainly, not all signs
are language—not even all significant sounds, such as the
natural cries of animals, or the inarticulate sounds and interjections
of men. The true nature of language consists in the
articulation, combination, variety, copiousness, extensive
and general use and easy application of signs—and all of
these are commonly found in vision ·as well as in languages
more conventionally so-called·. Other senses may indeed
provide signs, but those signs have no more right to be
thought to be a language than inarticulate sounds ·such as
a pained grunt or a surprised whistle·.
Alciphron: Wait! let me see. In language the signs are
arbitrary, aren’t they?
Euphranor: They are.
Alciphron: And consequently they don’t always suggest real
matters of fact ·because people sometimes say things that
are false·. Whereas this ‘natural language’ ·of vision·, as you
call it, or these visible signs, do always suggest things in
the same uniform way and have the same constant regular
connection with matters of fact. Which seems to imply that
their connection with what they signify is necessary, which
would mean they weren’t a language after all, according to
the definition of ‘language’ that we have been working with.
How do you solve this objection?
60
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
Euphranor: You can solve it yourself with the help of a picture
or a mirror.
Alciphron: You’re right. I see there is nothing in it. [When
I look at a certain picture I receive a visual ‘statement’ that there’s a
yellow tiger on that wall, and there isn’t; when I look in a mirror I receive
a visual ‘statement’ that there’s a bearded old man staring at me, and
there isn’t. This simple point really does counter Alciphron’s view that
visual ‘statements’ are necessarily connected with tangible realities.] I
don’t know what else to say about this view of yours, other
than that it’s so odd and contrary to my way of thinking that
I’ll never assent to it.
13. Euphranor: Remember, please, your own lectures
about prejudice, and apply them in the present case. Maybe
they will help you to follow where reason leads, and to be
suspicious of notions that are strongly riveted without ever
having been examined.
Alciphron: I indignantly reject the suspicion of prejudice. I’m
not speaking only for myself. I know a club of extremely able
men, the freest from prejudice of any men alive, who hate
the notion of a God, and I’m sure would be very able to untie
this knot.
[Dion, our narrator, speaks up here, remarking that
Alciphron’s reliance on others is unworthy of him and of
his principles, as well as being a dangerous tactic. Crito
then weighs in with scornful, colourful, offensive remarks
about how free-thinkers insincerely vary their standards of
intellectual conduct according to what company they are in.
A nasty quarrel is in the making, but Alciphron calls a halt
to this ‘irksome and needless discourse’. He continues:]
Alciphron: For my part, I am a friend to inquiry. I am willing
that reason should have its full and free scope. I build on no
man’s authority. For my part, denying a God doesn’t serve
my self-interest in any way. Any man may believe or not
believe a God, as he pleases. Still, Euphranor must allow me
to stare a little at his conclusions.
Euphranor: The conclusions are yours as much as mine, for
you were led to them by your own concessions.
14. You, it seems, ‘stare’ to find that God is not far from
every one of us, and that ‘in him we live and move and have
our being’ [Acts 17: 28]. First thing this morning you thought
it ‘strange’ that God should leave himself without a witness;
do you now think it strange that the witness should be so
full and clear?
Alciphron: I must say, I do. I was aware of a certain
metaphysical hypothesis to the effect that we see all things
in God by the union of the human soul with the intelligible
substance of the Deity, which neither I, nor anyone else
could make sense of. [This refers to a thesis of Malebranche’s. For
sober hard-thought-out reasons, he held that any ideas that come before
our minds are literally God’s—not ideas that he causes in us but ideas
that he has himself in his mind. The phrase ‘intelligible substance of the
Deity’ is typical Malebranche-speak.] But I never dreamed that
anyone would claim that we see God with our own physical
eyes as plainly as we see any human person whatsoever,
and that he daily speaks to our senses in a plain and clear
dialect.
Crito: As for that metaphysical hypothesis, I can make no
more of it than you can. But I think it’s clear that this optical
‘language’ ·that Euphranor has been describing· has a necessary
connection with knowledge, wisdom, and goodness. It
is equivalent to a constant creation, indicating an immediate
act of power and providence. It can’t be accounted for on
mechanical principles, by atoms or attractions or emanations
of gases. Here’s what we have:
The instantaneous production and reproduction of
ever so many signs—combined, dissolved, transposed,
61
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
diversified, and adapted to an endless variety of
purposes—constantly shifting in ways that are suitable
to the circumstances; incapable of being explained
by the laws of motion, chance, fate, or any
other such blind source of energy.
This presents and testifies to the immediate operation of a
spirit or thinking being—a wise, good, and provident spirit,
who directs and rules and governs the world. Some philosophers,
being convinced of the wisdom and power of the
creator from the structure and workings of organic bodies
and the orderly system of the world, nevertheless thought
that God left this system with all its parts and contents
well adjusted and set in motion, as an artisan leaves a
clock, to run on its own for a certain period. But this visual
language proves that there is not merely a •creator but a
caring •governor who is actually and intimately present to us,
attentive to all our interests and to all our movements, watching
our conduct and attending to our minutest actions and
designs throughout the whole course of our lives—informing,
scolding, and directing us incessantly, in a most evident and
perceptible manner. This is truly wonderful.
Euphranor: And isn’t it amazing that men should be surrounded
by such a wonder without reflecting on it?
15. There’s something divine and admirable in this
language addressed to our eyes, something that may well
awaken the mind and deserve its utmost attention: it •is
learned with so little trouble; •it expresses the differences
of things so clearly and aptly; it •instructs so quickly and
clearly, conveying by one glance a greater variety of bits of
advice, and a clearer knowledge of things, than could be
had from several hours of talk. And along with informing
it also •amuses and entertains the mind with such unique
pleasure and delight. It •is of excellent use in giving stability
and permanence to human discourse, in recording sounds
and bestowing life on dead languages, enabling us to ·write
and read, and thus to· converse with men of remote ages
and countries. And it •answers so precisely to our purposes
and needs, informing us more clearly about objects whose
nearness and size make them likely to do the most harm or
good to our bodies, and less exactly in proportion as their
smallness or distance from us makes them of less concern
to us.
Alciphron: And yet men aren’t much impressed by these
strange things.
Euphranor: But they aren’t strange, they’re familiar; and
that’s why they are overlooked. Things that rarely happen
make an impression when they do, whereas frequency
lessens our admiration for things that may in themselves be
ever so admirable. So an ordinary person who isn’t much
given to thinking and meditating would probably be more
convinced of the existence of a God by •one single sentence
heard once in his life coming down from the sky than by •all
the experience he has had of this visual language, contrived
with such exquisite skill, so constantly addressed to his
eyes, and so plainly declaring the nearness, wisdom, and
providence of the person who is addressing us.
Alciphron: But I still can’t help wondering how men should
be so little surprised or amazed by this visual faculty, if it
really is of such a surprising and amazing nature.
Euphranor: Let’s suppose a nation of men blind from birth,
among whom a stranger arrives, the only sighted man in
all the country; let’s suppose that this stranger travels with
some of the natives, and that he foretells that •if they walk
straight forward, in half an hour they’ll meet men or cattle,
or come to a house; that •if they make a right turn and then
keep walking they will in a few minutes be in danger of falling
62
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
down a precipice; that •by walking to the left they will in
such-and-such a time arrive at a river, a wood, or a mountain.
What do you think? Wouldn’t they be infinitely surprised
that someone who had never been in their country before
knew it so much better than themselves? And wouldn’t those
predictions seem to them as inexplicable and incredible as
prophecy would to a minute philosopher?
Alciphron: I can’t deny it.
Euphranor: But it seems to require intense thought to be
able to •sort out a prejudice that has been so long forming; to
•get over the vulgar error of thinking there are ideas that are
common to both senses, and thus to be able to •distinguish
the objects of sight from those of touch. These two kinds
of objects have—if I may put it this way—blended together
·so intimately· in our imagination that it’s extremely difficult
for us to think ourselves into the precise state one of those
men would be in if he were enabled to see. But I believe it
can be done; and it might seem worth the trouble of a little
thinking, especially to men who are specially and intensively
engaged in thinking, unravelling prejudices, and exposing
mistakes. I admit frankly that I can’t find my way out of this
maze—·i.e. I can’t think myself into the frame of mind of the
born-blind man who just begins to see·—and I would be glad
to be guided out of it by those who see better than I do.
[Crito quotes a biblical passage he is reminded of; then
a servant announces that tea is ready. They go inside for it,
and find Lysicles already there.]
16. ‘I am glad to have found my second,’ said Alciphron,
‘a fresh man to maintain our common cause, which I’m sure
Lysicles will think has suffered through his absence.’
Lysicles: Why so?
Alciphron: I have been drawn into some concessions you
won’t like.
Lysicles: Let me know what they are.
Alciphron: Well, that there is such a thing as a God, and that
his existence is very certain.
Lysicles: Bless me! How did you come to entertain such a
wild idea?
Alciphron: Well, you know we claim to follow reason wherever
it leads. In brief, I have been reasoned into it.
Lysicles: Reasoned! You should say ‘baffled with words’,
‘bewildered by sophistry’.
Euphranor: Would you like to hear the reasoning that led
Alciphron and me step by step, so that we can examine
whether or not it is sophistry?
Lysicles: I’m easy about that. I can guess everything that
can be said on that topic. It will be my business to help my
friend out, whatever arguments drew him in.
Euphranor: Will you admit the premises and deny the conclusions?
Lysicles: What if I admit the conclusion?
Euphranor: What! will you grant that there is a God?
Lysicles: Perhaps I may.
Euphranor: Then we are agreed.
Lysicles: Perhaps not.
Euphranor: O Lysicles, you are a subtle adversary! I don’t
know what you are up to.
Lysicles: Well, the existence of God is basically an affair
of little importance, and a man may make this concession
without yielding much. What really matters is what sense the
word ‘God’ is to be given. Even the Epicureans allowed that
there are gods, but then they were idle gods with no concern
about human affairs. Hobbes allowed a corporeal God; and
Spinoza held that the universe is God. Yet nobody doubts
63
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
that these men were staunch free-thinkers. I could wish
indeed that the word ‘God’ were entirely dropped, because in
most minds it is coupled with a sort of superstitious awe, the
very root of all religion. Still, I don’t much mind if •the name
‘God’ is retained, and •the existence of God accepted—in any
sense except that of
a mind that knows everything, and surveys human
actions—like some judge or magistrate—with infinite
care and intelligence.
The belief in God in this sense fills a man’s mind with worries,
puts him under constraints, and embitters his very being;
but the belief in God in another sense can be free of anything
much in the way of bad consequences. I know this was the
opinion of our great Diagoras, who told me he would never
have taken the trouble to discover a demonstration that there
is no God, if the generally accepted notion of God had been
the one that some of the church Fathers and scholastics
had.
Euphranor: And what was that?
17. Lysicles: Well, Diagoras. . . .had discovered that once
upon a time the deepest and most theoretically serious
theologians found that they couldn’t reconcile the attributes
of God, when taken in the ordinary sense or in any known
sense, with human reason and how the world shows itself to
be. So they adopted the doctrine that the words ‘knowledge’,
‘wisdom’, ‘goodness’ and so on, when applied to God, must
be understood in a quite different sense from •what they
mean in ordinary language and from •anything that we can
form a notion of or conceive. This let them easily answer any
objections that might be made against the attributes of God;
all they had to do was to deny that those attributes belonged
to God in this or that or any known particular sense; which
amounted to denying that they belonged to him at all. And
by denying the attributes of God they in effect denied his
existence, though they may not have been aware of that.
Here’s an example. Suppose a man were to object that
future contingencies are inconsistent with God’s foreknowledge,
because ‘certain knowledge of something that is uncertain’
is self-contradictory. The theologians I am talking
about had an easy answer to ready at hand, namely:
What you say may be true with respect to •‘knowledge’
taken in the ordinary sense, or in any sense that
we can possibly form any notion of. But there’s
no inconsistency between the contingent nature of
things and •‘divine foreknowledge’, taken to signify
something of which we know nothing—something that
serves God in the way that what we understand by
‘knowledge’ serves us. The difference between these
two is not one of quantity or degree of perfection;
they differ altogether, totally, in kind, as light differs
from sound. Actually, they differ even more than
that, because light and sound are both sensations;
whereas knowledge in God has no sort of resemblance
or agreement with any notion that man can form
of knowledge. The same can be said of all the other
attributes, which in this way can be equally reconciled
with everything or with nothing.
Any thinking person must see this is cutting knots rather
than untying them. For something can’t be reconciled with
the divine attributes when these attributes themselves are
denied of God in every intelligible sense, so that the very
notion of God is taken away, and nothing is left but the name
without any meaning attached to it. In short, the belief that
there is an unknown subject of attributes that are absolutely
unknown is a very innocent doctrine; which is why the acute
Diagoras, who saw this, was perfectly delighted with this
system.
64
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
18. ‘If this could once make its way and be accepted
in the world,’ Diagoras said, ‘that would put an end to all
natural or rational religion, which is the basis of both the
Jewish and the Christian religions; for someone who comes
to God, or goes into the church of God, must first believe
that there is a God in some intelligible sense; not merely
that there is something in general, without any proper
notion—even a very inadequate one—of any of its qualities
or attributes; for this ‘something in general’ could be fate,
or chaos, or creative nature, or anything else, as well as it
could be God. And it’s no help to say there is something
in this unknown being that is analogous to knowledge and
goodness; i.e. something that produces the effects that we
can’t conceive to be produced by men without knowledge
and goodness. For this is still to surrender to the atheist
side against the theists. The dispute has never been over
whether there is a Principle [= roughly ‘something absolutely basic
or primal’, ‘a first cause’], because all philosophers right back
to the pre-Socratics have agreed that there is. What they
haven’t agreed about is whether these are true or false:
•This Principle is a thinking intelligent being.
•The order, beauty and usefulness that we see in
natural effects couldn’t be produced by anything but
a mind or intelligence, properly so-called.
•The first cause must have had true, real, proper
knowledge.
So we ·on the atheist side, who think that all three are
false·, will accept that all the natural effects that are vulgarly
ascribed to knowledge and wisdom come from a being in
which there is no •knowledge or wisdom, properly so-called,
at all, but only •something else that causes the things that
men in their ignorance ascribe to what they call ‘knowledge’
and ‘wisdom’ and ‘understanding’. (You may be surprised
to hear a man of pleasure like me philosophizing in this
context! But there’s a lot to be gained from conversation with
able men; it’s a short-cut to knowledge, and saves one from
the drudgery of reading and thinking.)
So now we have granted to you that there is a ‘God’
in this indefinite sense—what use can you make of this
concession? You can’t argue from unknown attributes. You
can’t prove that God should be loved for his goodness, feared
for his justice, or respected for his knowledge. We agree
that all those consequences would follow from God’s having
‘goodness’ and the rest with those names taken in intelligible
senses, but we deny that any consequences follow from
attributes admitted in no particular sense, or in a sense that
none of us understand. Thus, since from such an account
of God nothing can be inferred about conscience, or worship,
or religion, you are welcome to the account! And so as not to
stand out from the crowd we’ll use the name ·‘God’· too, and
so snap! there’s an end of atheism!
Euphranor: This account of a deity is new to me. I don’t like
it, so I’ll leave it to be maintained by those who do.
19. Crito: It’s not new to me. A while ago I heard a
minute philosopher triumph on this very point, and that
set me to inquiring what basis there is for it in the church
Fathers or the scholastics. [Crito now embarks on a long
and learned lecture, starting with the early history of this
idea that ‘knowledge’ etc. are not to be applied to God in the
same sense as they are to men. Just how early its start was
is not clear, because issues arise about the true authorship
of various works. It is clear that the thesis wasn’t meant
in the flattening-out way in which Lysicles has understood
it, but rather than going into all those details we can safely
jump ahead to this:]
20. Thomas Aquinas expresses his sense of this matter as
follows. All perfections that created things get from God are
65
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
also perfections of God in a certain higher sense, which
the scholastics express by saying that those perfections
are in God ‘eminently’. So whenever we attribute to God
a perfection to which we give a name borrowed from that
perfection in created things, we must exclude from the
name’s meaning everything that belongs to the imperfect
way in which that attribute is found in created things. From
this he infers that knowledge in God is not a habit ·or
•disposition· but a pure •act. . . .
And although Suarez joins other scholastics in teaching
that the mind of man conceives knowledge and will to be
faculties or operations of God only by analogy to created
things, yet he plainly declares this [not a quotation from him]:
When it is said that ‘Knowledge is not properly in God’,
this must be understood to be referring to knowledge
including imperfection, e.g. conceptual knowledge or
some other imperfect kind of knowledge that created
beings have. None of those imperfections in the
knowledge of men or angels is a feature of knowledge
as such; there can be knowledge that doesn’t have
them. So from the premise that
•God doesn’t have such imperfection-including
knowledge
it doesn’t follow that
•knowledge, in the proper sense of ‘knowledge’,
can’t be attributed to God.
And of knowledge taken in a general way for the clear evident
understanding of all truth, he expressly affirms that this is in
God, and that this was never denied by any philosopher who
believed in a God. At that time the scholastics generally held
that even Being should be attributed to God and to created
things only analogically. That is, they held that God—the
supreme, independent, self-causing cause and source of all
beings—mustn’t be supposed to exist in the same sense of
‘exist’ as that in which created beings exist; not that •he
exists less truly or properly than they do, but only that •he
exists in a more eminent and perfect manner.
21. I wouldn’t want anyone to be led, through a misunderstanding
of scholastics’ use of the terms ‘analogy’
and ‘analogical’, to the view that we can’t get any distance
towards forming a true and proper notion of attributes that
we apply ·to God· by analogy. So let us look into the true
sense and meaning of those words. Everyone knows that
‘analogy’ is a Greek word used by mathematicians to signify
a likeness of proportions: for example, when we observe that
two is to six as three is to nine, this equality of proportion is
called ‘analogy’. And although the word ‘proportion’ strictly
signifies only the relation of one quantity to another, in a
looser derived sense it has been applied to signify every other
kind of relational property; and the term ‘analogy’ has been
broadened along with ‘proportion’, so that now it signifies
likeness ·or equality· in respect of all relations or relational
properties whatsoever. And so we find the scholastics telling
us there is an ‘analogy’ between intellect and sight, because
intellect is to the mind what sight is to the body; and that
he who governs the State is ‘analogous’ to him who steers a
ship, so that a monarch is analogically called a pilot, being
to the State what a pilot is to his vessel.
There’s something else that may help to clear this matter
up, namely the scholastics’ distinction between two kinds
of analogy—(1) metaphorical and (2) proper. (1) The Bible
has plenty of examples of metaphorical analogy, attributing
human parts and passions to God. When he is represented
as having a finger, an eye, or an ear; when he is said to repent,
to be angry, or grieved; everyone sees that the analogy is
merely metaphorical. Such things as parts and passions,
properly understood, essentially involve some imperfection.
So when it is said ‘the finger of God’ appears in some event,
66
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
men of common sense mean only that the event in question
is as truly ascribed to God as the works wrought by human
fingers are ascribed to man; and similarly with the rest. [The
phrase ‘the rest’ is Berkeley’s. If it is meant to cover anger and grief as
well as eyes and ears, Crito doesn’t explain how.] (2) But the case is
different when wisdom and knowledge are attributed to God.
Passions and senses as such involve defects; but there’s no
defect in knowledge as such. So it is all right to attribute
knowledge to God, therefore, in the proper formal meaning
of the word ‘knowledge’, as long as it is attributed in a way
that is proportional to God’s infinite nature. So we can say
that just as God is infinitely above man, so his knowledge is
infinitely above man’s. . . . Thus, this doctrine of analogical
perfections in God, or our knowing God by analogy, seems
to be misunderstood by those who infer from it that we can’t
form any direct or proper notion, however inadequate, of
knowledge or wisdom as these occur in God. . . .
22. And now, gentlemen, you may think I should ask
your pardon for having dwelt so long [it’s twice as long in the
original] on a point of metaphysics, and introduced into good
company such unpolished and unfashionable writers as the
scholastics! But Lysicles gave me the opening, so I leave him
to answer for it.
Lysicles: I never dreamed of this dry lecture! If I have
opened up the discussion to these scholarly matters by my
unfortunate mention of the scholastics, it was my first fault
of that kind and I promise it will be my last. I don’t enjoy
involvement with crabbed authors of any sort. It’s true that
occasionally one finds a good idea in what we call dry writers;
an example was the idea I was speaking of, which I must
admit struck my fancy. But for writers such as these we
have the likes of Prodicus and Diagoras, who read obsolete
books and save the rest of us that trouble.
Crito: So you pin your faith on them?
Lysicles: Only for some odd opinions, and matters of fact,
and critical points. ·But I could safely rely on them for more
than that·: we know the men in whom we put our trust;
they are judicious and honest, and have no aim except to
get to the truth. And I’m sure that some author or other
has maintained the view I presented, in the same sense as
Diagoras reported it.
Crito: That may be. But it never was a generally accepted
view, and it never will be so long as men believe in a God.
That is because the same arguments that
There was a first cause
also prove that
The first cause was intelligent (using ‘intelligent’ in its
proper sense), and also wise and good (using those
words too in their true and formal meanings).
. . . .But for your part, Alciphron, you have been fully convinced
that God is a thinking intelligent being, in the same
sense as other spirits though not in the same imperfect
manner or degree.
23. Alciphron: Well, I do have some worries about that.
With knowledge you infer [perhaps = ‘imply’] wisdom, and with
wisdom you infer goodness; and I can’t see that it is either
wise or good to enact laws that can’t ever be obeyed.
Crito: Does anyone find fault with the exactness of geometrical
rules because no-one in practice can achieve it? The
perfection of a rule is useful, even if it isn’t reached. Many
can approach something that no-one actually reaches.
Alciphron: But how is it possible to conceive of God as so
good when man is so wicked? There is some plausibility,
perhaps, to the idea that a little soft shadowing of evil sets
off the bright and luminous parts of the creation, and so
67
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
contributes to the beauty of the whole piece [here = ‘painting’];
but you can’t account in that way for such large black blots
·as those the world has·. That there should be so much
vice and so little virtue on earth, and that the laws of God’s
kingdom should be so poorly observed by his subjects—that’s
what can’t be reconciled with the surpassing wisdom and
goodness of the supreme monarch.
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, would you argue that a state
was ill administered, or judge the manners of its citizens,
on the evidence of the disorders committed in the gaol or
dungeon?
Alciphron: I would not.
Euphranor: Well, for all we know •this spot with its few
sinners may be as small a proportion of •the universe of
thinking beings as •a dungeon is of •a kingdom. We seem to
get our views not only from revelation but also from ordinary
plain sense-perception, which leads us to infer, by analogy
with the world as we see it, that there are innumerable orders
of intelligent beings happier and more perfect than man. Our
life is very short, and this earthly globe where we live is a
mere point in comparison with the whole system of God’s
creation. We are indeed dazzled by the glory and grandeur of
·some· things here below, because we know no better. But
I’m inclined to believe that if we knew what it was to be an
angel for one hour, we would return to this world—even to
sit on the brightest throne in it—with vastly more loathing
and reluctance than we would now descend into a loathsome
dungeon or sepulchre.
24. Crito: To me it seems natural that such a weak,
passionate and short-sighted creature as man is always
liable to worries of one kind or other. But as he—this very
same creature—is also apt to be over-positive in judging
and over-hasty in drawing conclusions, these difficulties
and doubts about God’s conduct are turned into objections
to his existence. And so men end up arguing from •their
own defects against •the divine perfections. And although
the views and temperaments of men are different and often
opposite, you can sometimes see them deduce the same
atheistic conclusion from contrary premises! Two minute
philosophers whom I know used to argue each from his
own temperament against a Providence [= ‘caring God’]. •One
of them, a bad-tempered and vindictive man, said that
he couldn’t believe in Providence because London had not
been swallowed up or consumed by fire from heaven. The
reason he gave was that the streets are full of people who
show no belief in God or worship of him except perpetually
praying that he would damn, rot, sink, and confound them.
[That sentence from ‘perpetually’ to the end is as Berkeley wrote it. The
original, like this version, seems to speak of people calling down God’s
wrath on themselves.] •The other, an idle good-tempered fellow,
concluded that there can’t be such a thing as Providence
because an utterly wise being would have to have better
things to do than attending to the prayers and actions and
little interests of mankind.
Alciphron: After all, if God has no passions, how can it be
true that vengeance is his? Or how can he be said to be
jealous of his glory? [‘For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God’
Exodus 20: 5. In this context, ‘jealous of his glory’ means ‘resentful of
anything that denies or belittles his glory’.]
Crito: We believe that God executes vengeance without
revenge, and is jealous without weakness, just as the mind
of man sees without eyes and grasps without hands, ·as
when we say ‘I see the flaw in your argument’ and ‘I grasp
the situation’·.
25. Alciphron: It’s time to end this part of the discussion.
So we’ll grant that there is a God in this dispassionate
68
Alciphron George Berkeley Fourth dialogue
sense—but then what of it? What does this have to do
with religion or divine worship? What is the point of all these
prayers and praises and thanksgivings and psalm-singing
that the foolish vulgar call ‘serving God’? What sense is there
in all these things? What use are they? What are they for?
Crito: We worship God, we praise and pray to him, not
•because we think that he is proud of our worship, or fond
of our praise or prayers and affected by them as mankind
are; or •because we think that our service can contribute
in some measure to his happiness or good; but •because it
is good for us to be disposed to relate in that way to God;
•because our worship is just and right, suitable to the nature
of things, and fitting to the way we relate to our supreme
lord and governor.
Alciphron: If it is good for us to worship God, it would seem
that the Christian religion, which claims to teach men the
knowledge and worship of God, is of some use and benefit to
mankind.
Crito: Doubtless.
Alciphron: Unless I am very much mistaken, you won’t be
able to show that that is right.
Crito: It is now nearly dinner-time. Let’s stop our conversation
for now, and pick it up again tomorrow morning.
69
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
Fifth dialogue (Saturday)
1. [Dion reports that on the next morning (Friday) the
group walked to a charming spot in the countryside and were
settling down for an all-day conversation when they were
interrupted by a clamour, including the barking of hounds
and ‘the roaring of country squires’. It was a fox-hunt, in
which one of the hunters had fallen from his horse and
broken a rib. The day was spent in getting him to Crito’s
home and caring for him there, sending for a ‘surgeon’,
feeding the fox-hunters, who with ‘loud rustic mirth gave
proof of their religion and loyalty by the healths they drank’,
and so on. The following morning the discussion-group
returned to the place where they had been when the hunt
and accident interrupted them.]
Now Lysicles, being a fastidiously elegant man and a witty
one, was utterly contemptuous of the rough manners and
conversation of the fox-hunters, and was angry that he had
‘lost’ so many hours in their company. ‘I cheered myself up’,
he said, ‘by the thought that there were no longer any of this
species among us [meaning, presumably, ‘moving in the social circles
in which I move’]. It’s strange that men should be entertained
by such uncouth noise and hurry, or find pleasure in the
society of dogs and horses! How much more elegant the
diversions of the town are!’
‘Fox-hunters’, replied Euphranor, ‘in a certain way resemble
free-thinkers. The fox-hunters employ their animal
faculties in pursuit of game, and you gentlemen employ your
intellectual faculties in the pursuit of truth. It’s the same
sort of pastime, though the objects are different.’
Lysicles: I would rather be compared to any brute on earth
than a rational brute. [In this context, ‘rational’ is code for ‘human’.
Lysicles is saying that he would rather be compared to sub-human
animal than to a brutish human being such as a fox-hunter.]
Crito: That means that you’d have been less displeased
with my friend Pythocles, whom I have heard compare the
common sort of •minute philosophers not to the •hunters
but to the •hounds. He gave this reason: ‘You’ll often see
among the dogs a loud babbler with a bad nose lead the
unskilful part of the pack, who all rush after him without
following any scent of their own, any more than the herd of
free-thinkers follow their own reason.’
2. But Pythocles was a blunt man; and he can’t ever have
encountered such reasoners among the free-thinkers as you
gentlemen, who can sit so long at an argument, dispute every
inch of ground, and yet know when to make a reasonable
concession.
Lysicles: I don’t know how it happened, but it seems that
Alciphron has been making concessions for me as well as
for himself. Speaking for myself, I’m not quite so ready to
concede things; but I don’t want to be a stand-out either.
Crito: Truly, Alciphron, when I consider how far we have
come and how far we are agreed, I think it’s likely that we’ll
eventually come to be in complete agreement. You have
granted that a life of virtue is to be preferred, as the kind of
life most conducive both to the general good of mankind and
to the good of individuals; and you allow that the beauty of
virtue isn’t by itself a strong enough motive to get mankind
to live virtuously. This led you to agree that the belief in a
God would be very useful in the world, and that therefore
you would be disposed to accept any reasonable proof of
his existence; such a proof has been given, and you have
accepted it.
70
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
Well, then, if we admit a Divinity, why not divine worship?
And if worship, why not religion to teach this worship? And
if some religion, why not the Christian one, if we can’t
find a better one and Christianity is already established
by the laws of our country and handed down to us from our
forefathers? Are we to believe in a God yet not pray to him
for future benefits or thank him for past ones? Not trust in
his protection, or love his goodness, or praise his wisdom, or
marvel at his power? And if these things are to be done, can
we do them in any way that is more suitable to the dignity
of God and man than the way laid down by the Christian
religion?
Alciphron: I am not perhaps altogether sure that religion
must be absolutely bad for the public; but I hate to see religion
walk hand in hand with considerations of government
and social order. I don’t like to see human rights tied to
religion. I am not in favour of any kind of governing high
priest [he reels off a list of countries that have had such].
3. I knew a witty free-thinker (he’s dead now) who was a
great admirer of the ancient Druids! He detested the present
established religion, but used to say that he would like to
see the Druids and their religion restored, as it flourished in
Gaul and Britain in ancient times. It would be a good thing,
he thought, that there should be a number of thoughtful
men set apart to preserve knowledge of arts and sciences, to
educate youth, and to teach men the immortality of the soul
and the moral virtues. ‘That is what the ancient Druids did,’
he said, ‘and I’d be glad to see them once more established
among us.’
Crito: How would you like it, Alciphron, •that priests should
have power to decide all controversies, settle disputes about
property, distribute rewards and punishments; •that anyone
who didn’t submit to their decrees should be excommunicated,
regarded with disgust, excluded from all honours and
privileges, and deprived of the common benefit of the laws;
and •that from time to time a number of laymen should
be crammed together in a wicker-work idol and burned ·to
death· as an offering to their pagan gods? How would you
like living under such priests and such a religion?
Alciphron: Not at all. Such a state of affairs would be utterly
unacceptable to free-thinkers.
Crito: But that’s what the Druids and their religion were like,
if we can trust Cæsar’s account of them.
Lysicles: I’m now more than ever convinced that there ought
to be no such thing as an established religion of any kind.
Certainly all the nations of the world have until now been
out of their wits. Even the Athenians—the wisest and freest
people on earth—had who-knows-what foolish attachment
to their established church. They offered, it seems, a
monetary reward to whoever would kill Diagoras of Melos, a
free-thinking contemporary who laughed at their mysteries:
and Protagoras, another of the same sort, narrowly escaped
being put to death for writing something that seemed to
contradict their accepted notions of the gods. That’s how
our noble sect was treated in ancient Athens. And I have
no doubt that your Druids would have sacrificed many a
holocaust [Berkeley’s word] of free-thinkers! I wouldn’t give a
farthing to exchange one religion for another. Away with
them all together, root and branch! Anything less than that
isn’t worth doing. No Druids or priests of any sort for me: I
see no place in the world for any of them.
4. Euphranor: This reminds me of how we ended our last
philosophical conversation. We agreed that next time we
would return to the point we had then just begun on, namely
the use or benefit of the Christian religion, which Alciphron
challenged Crito to show.
71
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
Crito: I’m all the readier to take this up because I don’t
think it is hard to do. One great mark of Christianity’s
truth is, in my view, its tendency to do good. It seems to be
the north star [a principal guide to navigation at sea] that guides
all our judgments about practical matters, including moral
ones, because these are always connected with universal
benefit. But to think straight about this matter we should
try to do what Lysicles did in an earlier conversation [see
pages 23–24], taking account of things as a whole, going as far
as we possibly can in seeing how principles branch out into
consequences. [In its four occurrences in this paragraph, ‘principle’
means ‘source’ or ‘seed’ (see Euphranor on pages 36–37).] We needn’t
pay much attention to •the moods or whims or imaginary
distresses of a few idle men, whose ideas may be offended
though their conscience can’t be wounded. What we have to
do is to consider fairly •the true interests of individuals as
well as of human society. Now, as is evident to anyone who
gets his notion of it from the Gospel, the Christian religion
is a fountain of light, joy and peace, a source of faith, hope
and charity; so it has to be a principle of happiness and
virtue. You’d have to be blind not to see that destroying •the
principles of good actions must destroy •good actions. As for
someone who sees this and yet persists in trying to destroy
the principles—if he isn’t wicked, who is?
5. It seems to me that any man who can see in some
depth and some breadth must
•be aware of his own misery, sinfulness and dependence;
•perceive that this present world is not designed or
adapted to make rational souls happy;
•welcome the chance to get into a better state; and
•be overjoyed to find that the road leading to that
better state involves loving God and man, practising
every virtue, living reasonably while we are here on
earth, proportioning the value we put on things to the
value they actually have, and using this world without
misusing it.
That’s what Christianity requires. It doesn’t require the
Cynic’s nastiness or the numbness of the Stoic. Can there
be a higher ambition than to •overcome the world, or a wiser
ambition than to •subdue ourselves, or a more comfortable
doctrine than •the forgiveness of sins, or a more joyful
prospect than that of •having our low nature renovated and
assimilated to the Deity, our being made fellow-citizens with
angels, and sons of God? Did Pythagoreans or Platonists or
Stoics ever propose to the mind of man •purer means or •a
nobler end? How much of our happiness depends on hope!
How totally is hope extinguished by the minute philosophy!
On the other hand, how it is cherished and raised by the
Gospel! Let anyone who thinks seriously consider these
things and then say which he thinks deserves better of
mankind—he who recommends Christianity or he who runs
it down? Which does he think is likelier to lead a happy life,
to be a hopeful son, an honest dealer, a worthy patriot—he
who sincerely believes the Gospel, or he who doesn’t believe
a word of it?—he who aims at being a child of God, or he who
is content to be known as one of Epicurus’s hogs? Just look
at the characters and behaviour of average examples of the
two sorts of men, and then say which sort live in a way that
accords best with the dictates of reason! [The preparer of this
text asked Anthony Long (UC Berkeley) for help with ‘Epicurus’s hogs’,
and this was part of his reply (included with permission): ‘In the last
verse of Horace’s little Epistle to Tibullus he describes himself to his fellow
poet as “a hog from Epicurus’s herd”. In his self-mocking context Horace
says that he has been observing the Epicurean rule of living care-free
for the day: “When you want to laugh, you will see me sleek and fat,
in fine shape, a hog...” Horace knows that the true Epicurean is not a
voluptuary, but he ironically echoes that stock prejudice.’]
72
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
6. Alciphron: It’s amazing to see how different things
look when they are viewed in different lights, or by different
eyes. The picture I have of religion is very unlike yours,
Crito, when I consider how it unmans the soul, filling it with
absurd dreams and slavish fears; how it extinguishes the
gentle passions, inspiring a spirit of malice and rage and
persecution; when I see bitter resentments and unholy wrath
in the very men who preach meekness and charity to others.
Crito: Perhaps gentlemen of your sect think that religion is
a subject beneath their attention; but it seems to me that
someone who sets about opposing any doctrine ought to
know what he is opposing. So I’ll tell you: religion is the
virtuous mean between disbelief and superstition. We don’t
defend superstitious follies, or the rage of bigots. What we
plead for is
•religion against irreligion,
•law against confusion,
•virtue against vice,
•the hope of a Christian against the despondency of an
atheist.
I won’t defend ‘bitter resentments and unholy wrath’ in
any man, much less in a Christian, and least of all in
a clergyman. But if even the best Christians sometimes
produce outbursts of ·angry· emotion, that won’t surprise
anyone who reflects on the sarcasms and rudeness with
which Christians are treated by the minute philosophers.
For, as Cicero remarks somewhere, ‘an insult has a sting
that a wise and good man will find it hard to bear’ [he says it in
Latin]. But even if you sometimes see particular self-professed
Christians going to faulty extremes of any kind, through
passion and weakness, while unbelievers of a calmer and
cooler temperament sometimes behave better, this contrast
proves nothing in favour of disbelief or against Christianity.
If a believer acts badly, that is because of the man, not of his
belief. And if an unbeliever does good, that is because of the
man, not of his unbelief.
7. Lysicles: . . . .You won’t deny that the clergy are
regarded as physicians of the soul, and that religion is a
sort of medicine that they deal in and administer. Well, now,
if very many souls are diseased and lost, how can we think
that their the physician is skillful or that his medicine is
good? It’s a common complaint that vice increases, and
men grow more wicked by the day. If a shepherd’s flock is
diseased or unsound, who is to blame but the shepherd, for
neglecting them or not knowing how to cure them? I have
nothing but contempt for such shepherds, such medicine,
and such physicians, who do what all hucksters do—use
grave and elaborate speeches to peddle their pills to the
people, who are never the better for them.
Euphranor: It seems utterly reasonable to say that we should
base our judgment of a physician and his medicine on the
medicine’s effect on the sick. But tell me, Lysicles, would
you judge a physician by •the sick who take his medicine
and follow his prescriptions, or by •those who don’t?
Lysicles: Doubtless by those who do.
Euphranor: Well, then, what are we to say if great numbers of
sick people refuse to take the medicine, and instead of it take
poison of a directly opposite nature that has been prescribed
by others whose concern it is to discredit the physician and
his medicines, to block men from using them, and to destroy
their effect by drugs of their own? Is the physician to blame
for the health troubles of those people?
Lysicles: By no means.
Euphranor: By the same line of argument, doesn’t it follow
that the tendency of religious doctrines should be judged by
the effects they produce, not on all who hear them, but only
on those who accept or believe them?
73
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
Lysicles: It seems so.
Euphranor: If we are to be fair, then, shouldn’t we judge the
effects of religion by the religious, of faith by believers, of
Christianity by Christians?
8. Lysicles: But I suspect there are very few of these
sincere believers.
Euphranor: Still, won’t it suffice to justify our principles if,
in proportion to the numbers who accept them, and the
strength of the faith with which they are accepted, they
produce good effects? There may be more such believers
than you think; and if there aren’t, isn’t that the fault of
those who make it their proclaimed purpose to lessen that
number? And who are those but the minute philosophers?
Lysicles: I say it is owing to the clergy themselves, to the
wickedness and corruption of clergymen.
Euphranor: And who denies that there may be minute
philosophers even among the clergy?
Crito: In such a numerous a body there are bound to be
men of all sorts. But despite the cruel reproaches flung at
the clergy by their enemies, I think that any fair-minded
observer of men and things will be inclined to regard those
reproaches as revealing faults in those who fling them as
much as in the clergy at whom they are flung—especially if
he takes into account the strident tone of those who censure
the clergy.
Euphranor: I don’t know enough of the world to claim to
judge the virtue, merit and wide-ranging accomplishments of
men in the various professions; and anyway I don’t like the
odious work of comparison. But I’m willing to say this: the
clergy in this region where I live are by no means a disgrace
to it; on the contrary, the people seem to profit greatly from
their example and doctrine. But supposing the clergy to
be sinners and faulty (as of course all men certainly are);
supposing you could detect here and there among them great
crimes and vices; what inference can you draw against the
profession itself from its unworthy practitioners, any more
than the pride, pedantry and bad lives of some philosophers
creates a case against philosophy, or those of lawyers a case
against law?
9. Crito: It is certainly right to judge principles from their
effects; but then we must know them to be effects of those
principles. It’s precisely the method I have followed with
respect to religion and the minute philosophy. I can honestly
say that I •never knew any man or family become worse
in proportion as they became religious; but I have •often
observed that minute philosophy is the worst thing that can
get into a family, the easiest way to impoverish, divide and
disgrace it.
Alciphron: What I have observed, by this same method of
tracing causes from their effects, is that the love of truth,
virtue and the happiness of mankind are good stuff for
speeches but they aren’t what drive the clergy in their work.
If they were, why would clergymen be—as they all are—so
fond of abusing human reason, disparaging natural religion,
and trashing the philosophers and scientists?
Crito: Not all. It’s true that a Christian favours confining
reason within its proper bounds, but so does every
reasonable man. If we are forbidden to get involved with
unprofitable questions, empty philosophy, and ‘science’ that
isn’t really science, it doesn’t follow that all inquiries into
profitable questions, useful philosophy, and real science
are unlawful. . . . No man of good sense will make those
inferences. . . . It is generally acknowledged that there is a
natural religion that can be discovered and proved by the
light of reason, to those who are capable of such proofs. But
still it has to be admitted that precepts and oracles from
74
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
heaven are incomparably better suited to the improvement of
ordinary folk and the good of society than are the reasonings
of philosophers. That’s why we don’t find that natural or
rational religion ever became the popular national religion of
any country.
10. Alciphron: It can’t be denied that in all heathen
countries a world of fables and superstitious rites have been
accepted under the colour of religion. But I question whether
they were as absurd and harmful as they are vulgarly
said to have been, because their respective legislators and
magistrates [see note on page 5] must surely have thought them
useful. . . .
Crito: We don’t deny that there was something useful in
the old religions of Rome and Greece and some other pagan
countries. On the contrary, we freely admit that they had
some good effects on the people. But these good effects
came from the truths contained in those false religions—the
more truth a religion contained, therefore, the more useful
it was. I think you’ll have difficulty producing any useful
truth, any moral precept, any healthy principle or notion in
any non-Christian system of religion or philosophy, that isn’t
included in the Christian religion, where it is either enforced
by stronger motives, or supported by better authority, or
carried to a higher point of perfection.
11. Alciphron: So you want us to think ourselves a finer
people than the ancient Greeks or Romans.
Crito: If by ‘finer’ you mean better, perhaps we are; and if
we aren’t, it’s not because we have the Christian religion but
because too many of us don’t.
[Alciphron protests that Crito’s ‘Perhaps we are’ is indefensible.
He contrasts Cicero and Brutus with ‘an English
patriot’, and Seneca with ‘one of our parsons’. Crito replies
that ‘those great men were not the minute philosophers of
their times’, and that the best of their principles were also
Christian ones. He adds that the current standing of some
of the great men of the ancient world is partly due to their
undeniable personal merits, partly to favourable publicity,
and not at all to their not being Christian. As for more
recent times, a careful look shows a great deal of moral
improvement in Europe, under the influence of Christianity.
For a start, he says, let’s take a look at England.]
Alciphron: I have heard much of the glorious light of the
Gospel, and would be glad to see some effects of it in my
own dear country—which is, incidentally, one of the most
corrupt and profligate on earth, despite the boasted purity of
our religion. But you wouldn’t be showing much confidence
in your religion if you compared it only with ·that of· the
barbarous heathen from whom we are derived. If you want
to honour your religion, have the courage to make your
comparison with the most renowned heathens of antiquity.
Crito: It is a common prejudice to despise the present and
over-rate remote times and things. There’s a touch of this in
the judgments men make concerning the ·ancient· Greeks
and Romans. Those nations certainly did produce some
noble spirits and great patterns of virtue, but over-all they
seem to me to have been much inferior in real virtue and
good morals to our ‘corrupt and profligate’ nation. (So you
called it, to bring dishonour to our religion. I wonder how you
would choose to describe it when you wanted to do honour to
the minute philosophy!) [Crito backs up his statement about
the Greeks and Romans by citing examples: the treatment
of slaves and prisoners of war, killing of unwanted children,
gladiators; and also ‘bacchanals and unbridled lusts of every
kind’. These don’t have parallels in contemporary England,
he says, largely because of Christianity. Alciphron replies
that Crito is overlooking facts that don’t fit his views, citing
75
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
‘the inhumanity of that barbarous custom of duelling’. Crito
agrees that duelling is bad: ‘I shan’t make an apology for
every Goth that walks the streets with a determined purpose
to murder any man who spits in his face or calls him a liar.’
He goes on to say that Christianity isn’t responsible for this;
and Alciphron says that that’s irrelevant to the immediate
present topic, which is just a comparison of contemporary
England with ancient Greece and Rome. Crito accepts this,
and returns to the comparison they were making, saying
that duelling isn’t as bad as the common Roman practice of
poisoning.]
Lysicles: That’s very true. Duelling is not as general a
nuisance as poisoning, and it’s not so low either. This crime
(if it is a crime) has a good chance of holding on despite the
law and the Gospel. (1) The clergy never preach against it
because (2) they don’t suffer from it personally; and a man of
honour mustn’t appear to oppose the means of vindicating
honour, ·which is what duelling is·.
Crito: You aren’t the first free-thinker to say that (1) the
clergy are not given to preaching against duelling; but in
my view (1) that remark itself is unfair, and so is (2) your
statement about why the clergy stay away from this topic.
(1) In effect, half of their sermons—all that is said about
charity, brotherly love, forbearance, meekness, and forgiving
injuries—is directly against this wicked custom ·of duelling·.
As for the claim that (2) they •never suffer from it themselves,
that is so far from true that one can make a case for saying
that they suffer from it •oftener than other men.
Lysicles: How can you make good on that claim?
Crito: [The ferocity of this passage suggests that it reflects Berkeley’s
own personal experiences of being ‘bullied’ by cowards.] There are
two kinds of bully, the fighting and the tame, both public
nuisances. The fighting bully is the more dangerous animal,
but there are far fewer of them than of tame bullies. The tame
bully exerts his talents against clergymen, which the fighting
bully never does. The qualities of a man that make him
count as a tame bully are •natural rudeness combined with
a •delicate sense of danger—·meaning danger to himself ·.
You see, the fashionable custom of calling men to account
for their behaviour (·i.e. challenging them to a duel·) has
not lessened the force of inbred insolence and bad manners;
it has merely turned that force in a new direction. So you
can often see one of these tame bullies nearly bursting with
offended pride and bad temper that he dares not express
openly ·because he is afraid of being challenged to a duel·,
until a parson comes his way, providing relief—·i.e. giving
his angry state a safe outlet·. . . .
14. Alciphron: But to return to our topic, can you deny
that the ancient Romans were as famous for justice and
integrity as today’s men are for the opposite qualities?
Crito: You can’t get the character of the Romans from the
opinions of Cicero, the actions of Cato, or a few shining
episodes scattered through their history. What you need to
consider is the prevailing tenor of their lives and notions.
[And then, he says, the picture changes; and he goes on
to cite examples of atrocious publicly approved conduct
by the Romans. Then:] I venture to say that if you take
Roman history from one end to the other, and impartially
compare it with our own, you won’t find the Romans to be
as good as you imagine, or your countrymen to be as bad.
On the contrary, I really do think that an unbiased eye will
detect a vein of charity and justice—an effect of Christian
principles—running through England today. . . .
15. Crito paused, and Alciphron spoke up, addressing
himself to Euphranor and me: ‘It is natural for men, according
to their various upbringings and prejudices, to form
76
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
opposite judgments about the same things. . . . Crito, for
instance, imagines that religion has only salutary effects,
but if you appeal to the general experience and observation
of other men, you’ll find that the statement Tantum religio
potuit suadere malorum has grown into a proverb which says
that religion is the root of evil. [It was said by Lucretius, and wasn’t
a generalization about religion. Speaking of Agamemnon’s sacrifice of
his daughter to a goddess in the hope of getting favourable winds for his
attack on Troy, Lucretius wrote ‘So greatly was religion able to persuade
·a man· to do evil’.] Not just among Epicureans or other ancient
heathens, but among moderns speaking of the Christian
religion. I think it is unreasonable to set up against •the
general concurring opinion of the world •the observation of
a particular person, or a particular set of zealots, whose
prejudice sticks close to them and keeps mixing in with their
judgments—zealots who read, draw conclusions, and observe
with an eye not to discovering the truth but to defending
their prejudice.’ [Notice how nasty the tone has become. This is said
about Crito, in his presence, but not addressed to him directly.]
Crito: Although I can’t share Alciphron’s views, I admire his
skill and dexterity in argument. Sometimes he represents
an opinion’s acceptance by people in general as a sure sign
of its being wrong; but when that doesn’t suit his purposes
he just as easily makes it a sure sign of truth! But the
fact •that an irreligious proverb is used by the friends and
admired authors of a minute philosopher doesn’t imply •that
the proverb is something generally accepted, still less that
it is a truth based on the experience and observation of
mankind. . . . ·And this one isn’t a truth·. It would be
as reasonable to think that darkness is a natural effect of
sunshine as to think that sullen and furious passions come
from the glad tidings and divine precepts of the Gospel. The
sum and substance, the scope and end, of Christ’s religion
is the love of God and man. All other doctrines and duties
(whether legal or moral) are subordinate to this, as
parts of it,
means to it,
signs of it,
principles arising from it,
motives to adhere to it, or
effects of it.
Tell me, now, how could evil or wickedness of any kind
comes from such a source? I don’t say that there are no
evil qualities in Christians, or that there are no good ones
in minute philosophers. But I do say this: whatever evil
there is in us, our principles certainly lead to good; and
whatever good there may be in you, it is most certain that
your principles lead to evil.
16. Alciphron: It must be admitted that Christianity looks
handsome on the outside, and many plausible things can be
said in favour of the Christian religion taken simply as we
find it in the Gospel.
[He goes on to report the view of ‘one of our great writers’
[Shaftesbury] that the first Christian preachers sneakily made
Christianity look good—‘all love, charity, meekness, patience,
and so forth’—until they had •converted much of the world
and •come to have political power, and then ‘they soon
changed their appearance, and showed cruelty, ambition,
avarice, and every bad quality’. Crito responds that this is
very stupid: the first Christian preachers died for their faith.]
Alciphron: And yet ever since this religion has appeared in
the world we have had eternal feuds, factions, massacres,
and wars, the very reverse of that hymn with which it is
introduced in the Gospel: ‘Glory be to God on high, on earth
peace, good-will towards men.’
[Crito accepts this, adds that Christianity was often the
‘pretext’ for these evils, but insists that this doesn’t mean it
77
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
was their cause. He then says that the evils of the Christian
era were matched and outnumbered by evils in pre-Christian
times. All these evils, early and late, were] the common
product of the passions and vices of mankind, which are
sometimes covered with the mask of religion by wicked men
who have the •form of godliness without the •power of it.
This is so obviously true that I’m surprised that any man of
sense, knowledge, and candour can doubt it.
17. [He returns to ancient Rome, with more examples of
horrors. Alciphron agrees that the Romans ‘had a high and
fierce spirit, which produced. . . .very bloody catastrophes’.
But the ancient Greeks, he says, ‘were a civilized and gentle
sort of men, softened by arts and philosophy’. Crito replies
that ‘the little states and cities of Greece’ (as Alciphron calls
them) had their factions ‘which persecuted each other with
such treachery, rage and malice that our factious folk are
mere lambs by comparison; for evidence of this he refers to
Thucydides’ history of the war between Athens and Sparta;
and he expresses contempt for] free-thinkers, divers to the
bottom of things, fair inquirers, and openers of eyes, who are
capable of such a gross mistake ·as sentimentalising ancient
Greece·.
18. Alciphron: The rest of mankind we could more easily
give up; but as for the Greeks, men of the most refined
genius express a high esteem of them, not only on account
of •the qualities that you think fit to allow them but also for
•their virtues.
Crito: . . . .On ·the basis of· the fullest and fairest observation
I can make, I think that if ‘virtue’ stands for truth, justice
and gratitude, there is incomparably more virtue right now
in England than could ever be found in ancient Greece. [He
goes on about the ingratitude that some Greek states showed
to some of their citizens who had been benefactors, and then
moves on to this:] As for the source of the chief advantage of
the Greeks and Romans and other nations that have made
the greatest figure in the world, I’m inclined to think it was
their special reverence for the laws and institutions of their
countries. These inspired them with steadiness and courage,
and with the heartfelt and noble love of their country; and
what they understood to be their country was not confined by
language or ethnic origin, still less by geographical location;
their notion of their country also took in a certain system
of manners, customs, notions, rites, and civil and religious
laws.
Alciphron: I can see your drift! You want us to revere the
laws and religious institutions of our country. Well, excuse
us if we don’t see fit to imitate the Greeks, or to be governed
by any authority whatsoever.
Crito: I’m sure you don’t. If Islam were established by
law, I don’t doubt that the free-thinkers—the very ones who
applaud Turkish maxims and manners so loudly that you’d
think they were ready to turn Turkish—would be the first to
protest against them.
Alciphron: But to return ·to our topic·: I agree that there
always have been wars and factions in the world, and that
there always will be on some pretext or other, as long as men
are men.
19. But there’s a specifically Christian sort of •war and
sort of •warrior, one that the heathens had no notion of. [The
noun ‘divine’ has been replaced by ‘theologian’ in this version; but its occurrence
in this paragraph and the next is left unaltered, for reasons that
you’ll see.] I’m talking about •disputes in theology (·the wars·)
and •polemical divines (·the warriors·), which the world has
been amazingly pestered with. If you take their word for it,
they are teaching peace, meekness, harmony and whatnot,
but even a cursory look at how they behave shows them to
78
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
have been, all through the centuries, the most contentious,
quarrelsome, disagreeing crew that ever appeared on earth.
The skill and trickery, the zeal and eagerness, with which the
scholastic divines (those barbarians!) split hairs and quarrel
over non-existent imagined things is more absurd and a
greater scandal to human reason than all the ambitious
intrigues, plots and politics of the court of ·ancient· Rome,
and makes me even angrier than those do.
Crito: If divines are quarrelsome, it’s not because they
are divine but because they are undivine and unChristian.
Justice is a good thing, and so is the art of healing; yet men
can be wronged in the administering of justice or poisoned
in the giving of medicine. But just as wrong can’t be justice
or an effect of justice, and poison can’t be medicine or an
effect of medicine, so also pride or strife can’t be religion or
an effect of religion. Having said that, I agree that you can
often see hot-headed bigots signing up with religious parties
as well as political ones, without being of credit or service
to either. [For the next bit, you need to remember that the scholastics
were Roman Catholic philosophical theologians, while Berkeley was an
Anglican.] As for the scholastics in particular, I don’t think
the Christian religion has any need to defend them, their
doctrines, or their method of handling them. Still, however
futile their views may be and however clumsy their language,
it’s simply not true that they sneer and scold and rant in
their writings; and they are so far from showing fury or
passion that an impartial judge might rate them far ahead
of the minute philosophers in •keeping close to the point,
and in their •tone and good manners. But, anyway, if men
are puzzled, tangle with one another, talk nonsense and
quarrel about religion, they do the same about law, medicine,
politics, and everything else that matters. It’s not just in
•divinity that men run into disputes, trickery, nonsense and
contradictions; it also happens in •the other professions I
have mentioned, and indeed in •any pursuit where men have
created abstract theory. But this doesn’t stop there being
many excellent rules, sound ideas and useful truths in all
those professions. In all disputes, human emotions too often
get stirred into the mix in proportion as the subject is thought
to be more or less important. But we oughtn’t to confuse the
cause of man with the cause of God, or make human follies
an objection to divine truths. It’s easy to distinguish •what
looks like wisdom from above from •what comes from the
passion and weakness of men. The distinction is so obvious
that when someone doesn’t draw it one might be tempted to
think that this is a result not of ignorance but of something
worse. [The hostile tone isn’t improving!]
20. The conduct we cite in objections to minute philosophers
is a natural consequence of their principles. Anything
they can cite in objections to us is an effect not of our
principles but of human passion and frailty.
Alciphron: Oh, terrific! So we must no longer cite, in objections
against Christians, the absurd contentions of Councils,
the cruelty of Inquisitions, the ambition and power-grabbing
of churchmen?
Crito: You can cite them as objections against Christians, but
not against Christianity. If the divine author of our religion
and his disciples have sowed a good seed, and if together
with this good seed the enemies of his gospel (including the
minute philosophers of all ages) have sowed bad seeds from
which weeds and thistles grow, isn’t it obvious that these
bad weeds can’t be blamed on the good seed or on those who
sowed it? [He develops this point at considerable and not
very interesting length. Alciphron responds by shifting to a
different complaint: the triviality and unimportance of much
theological writing.]
79
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
Crito: I shan’t undertake to vindicate theological writings
as such; a general defence of them would be as needless
as a general accusation is groundless. But let them speak
for themselves, and don’t condemn them on the word of a
minute philosopher! Anyway, let’s look at the worst case.
Imagine a quarrelsome pedant in divinity who disputes
and ruminates and writes on some refined point that is
as useless and unintelligible as you please. But then ask
yourself what would have become of this man if he had been
brought up to be a layman ·rather than a cleric·. Mightn’t he
have employed himself in shifty business deals, harassing
law-suits, factions, seditions, and such like amusements,
doing much more harm to the public ·than he actually does
with his useless theological studies·?. . . .
[The two pages between here and 27 occupy five pages in the original.
They aren’t of much philosophical interest.] [Alciphron complains
that in theological disputes ‘what men lack in light they
commonly make up in heat’. Crito replies that in any branch
of study, when some isolated point is being looked into
with great care, that tends to generate an inflated sense of
its importance; but this is routine stuff, and not special
to theology. Alciphron complains that trivial theological
squabbles are regarded as ‘learning’, and the public takes
an interest in them as though they were sporting events. He
objects to theological writings on stylistic grounds. . . ]
Alciphron: . . . What man of sense or breeding would not
detest the infection of long-winded pulpit eloquence; or of
that dry, formal, pedantic, stiff and clumsy style that smells
of the lamp and the college?
21. Those who are foolish enough to admire the universities
as centres of learning must think that my reproach
(‘smells of the college’) is a strange one; but it is perfectly
fair. These days, the ablest men agree that the universities
are merely hot-beds of prejudice, corruption, barbarism, and
pedantry.
Lysicles: Speaking for myself, I find no fault with universities.
All I know is that I had three hundred pounds a year to spend
in one of them, and it was the happiest time of my life. As
for their books and style ·of writing·—I didn’t have time to
pay any attention to them.
Crito: Whoever wants to pull weeds will never lack work—
there’s no shortage of bad books on every subject. I don’t
know what theological writings Alciphron and his friends
are familiar with, but I venture to say that our English
theologians include many writers who, for breadth of learning,
solidity of content, strength of argument and purity of
style are not inferior to any writers in our language. . . . As
for our universities, which are (of course) imperfect, any
impartial observer will find that with all their flaws they are
better than universities in other countries, and much better
than the mean picture that minute philosophers draw of
them. It’s natural that the loudest complaints against places
of education come from those who have profited least by
them. . . .
Alciphron: Crito mistakes the point. I am relying on the
authority not of a dunce or a rake or an absurd parent
[examples that Crito has used], but of the most accomplished
critic this age has produced. This great man characterizes
men of the church and universities with the finest touches
and most masterly pencil. What do you think he calls them?
Euphranor: What?
Alciphron: Why, ‘the black tribe’, ‘magicians’, ‘formalists’,
‘pedants’, ‘bearded boys’; and after having sufficiently derided
and exploded them and their mean and crude learning,
he provides the most admirable models of good writing,
namely his own writings. They have to be acknowledged as
80
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
the finest things in our language—as I could easily convince
you, for I also have with me something by that noble writer.
[After an exchange about a noble writer who is also a
nobleman (in fact, Shaftesbury), Alciphron takes a book from
his pocket and starts to read a long, flowery, unclear passage
in which idleness is praised as being better than busy greed.
It is quoted verbatim from Shaftesbury’s book Characteristics
of. . . etc., except that Berkeley mischievously puts it on the
page as fifty lines blank verse, of which this is typical:]
But here a busy form solicits us,
Active, industrious, watchful, and despising
Pains and labour. She wears the serious
Countenance of Virtue, but with features
Of anxiety and disquiet.
What is’t she mutters? What looks she on
with such admiration and astonishment?
[And so on, until Euphranor interrupts with a protest: ‘Why
should we interrupt our discussion to read a play?’ It isn’t
a play or poetry, Alciphron replies, ‘but a famous modern
critic moralizing in prose’. He goes on about this great
man’s discoveries and his writings. Euphranor comments
sarcastically on the kind of man who ‘offers to reform the
style and taste of the age’; and Alciphron, not hearing the
sarcasm, continues enthusiastically about ‘the admired critic
of our times’ who has, among other things, argued that
Shakespeare, Milton and others have been greatly over-rated.
Euphranor asks what effect ‘this great man’ has had on the
public. ‘Do they aspire to his sublimity, or imitate his chaste
unaffected style?’ Alciphron, still naively enthusiastic, says
that ‘the taste of the age is much mended’. Crito gets in a
slap at the writing-style of minute philosophers, and then
shifts the conversation back towards where it was a few
minutes ago. ‘When your great man tells us that ignorance
and ill taste are due to the Christian religion or the clergy,
I can’t just take his word for it.’ The truth is the opposite
of that, Crito says, in a speech that is summed up in this:
‘Everyone who knows anything knows that we are indebted
for our learning to the Greek and Latin tongues,. . . .and that
we are indebted for those tongues to our religion. What
else could have made foreign and dead languages in such
demand among us?’ Alciphron speaks harshly of ‘one sort of
learning that is undoubtedly of Christian origin, and special
to the universities’—he deplores the years that young people
waste ‘in acquiring the mysterious jargon of scholasticism’
and the further years they have to spend being untaught it
by the world.]
Crito: But what if this scholastic learning was not of Christian
but of Moslem origin, being derived from the Arabs?
And what if this complaint about gentlemen’s spending
several years in learning and unlearning this jargon is just a
sham, and [this is said sarcastically] a specimen of the truth and
candour of certain minute philosophers? Surely it wouldn’t
be such a deplorable loss of time if a young gentleman spent a
few months on the much despised and decried art of Logic—a
surplus of logic is by no means the prevailing nuisance
of this age! It is one thing to •waste one’s time learning
and unlearning the barbarous terms, ultra-fine distinctions,
and long-winded sophistry of the scholastics; it’s another to
•attain some exactness in defining and arguing—things that
may be not altogether beneath the dignity even of a minute
philosopher. Logic used to be regarded as its own object—·i.e.
a self-sufficient subject all on its own·—so that the art of
reasoning, instead of being transferred to •things, was aimed
only at •words and •abstractions, which produced a sort of
leprosy in all branches of knowledge. . . . But those times
are past, and logic—once cultivated as the chief branch of
knowledge—is now considered in another light; it doesn’t
81
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
play anything like the part in the studies of young gentlemen
at the universities that is attributed to it by those admirable
reformers of religion and learning, the minute philosophers.
25. [Crito goes on to say that ‘the restoration of arts
and civilized learning’ has been due to the influence of
Christians, whom he names at length. In the course of
this, he speaks of the great scholars ‘who flourished on the
other side of the Alps in the Golden Age (as the Italians
call it) of ·Pope· Leo the tenth’; and Alciphron challenges
this, saying that the ‘noble critic’ from whom he quoted a
few minutes ago regards the Italians as ‘corrupters of true
learning and erudition’. Crito replies with some slighting
remarks about the noble critic, and surprisingly Lysicles
backs him up, saying in effect that someone who writes so
much about ‘art and taste and critical skill’ oughtn’t to write
as badly as that man (Shaftesbury) does. In the course of
some further skirmishing between Alciphron and Crito about
whether and to what extent English culture is indebted ‘to
church or universities or ancient languages’, Crito speaks of
Christianity as a generator of arts and sciences and also of
‘the general sense of virtue and humanity, and the belief in
a providence and after-life, which all the argumentation of
minute philosophers has not yet been able to abolish’. That
remark brings the topic of Christianity-and-culture to an
end, because Alciphron replies:]
27. Alciphron: It is strange that you still persist in
arguing as though all the gentlemen of our sect were enemies
to virtue and downright atheists, when I have assured you
•that, on the contrary, we have among us a number of people
who announce their support for virtue and natural religion,
and I have also assured you •that I myself now argue on that
basis.
Crito: How can you claim to support natural religion, and yet
be open enemies of Christianity, which is the only established
religion that includes whatever is excellent in natural religion,
and which is the only means of making those precepts,
duties and notions become reverenced throughout the world?
Suppose someone tried to persuade people that he was
greatly in support of a particular earthly monarch, that he
loved and admired his government; while at the same time
he took every opportunity to express himself as a most bitter
enemy of the very persons and methods that contributed
most to •the monarch’s service, and to •making his dignity
known and revered, his laws observed, or his dominion
extended—wouldn’t such a person be thought weak or insincere?
And isn’t this just what minute philosophers ·like you·
do: announce themselves as advocates of God and religion,
and yet do all they can to discredit Christians and their
worship? Admittedly, you argue against Christianity ·in one
way that doesn’t necessarily express hostility to religion as
such, namely· by representing Christianity as the cause of
evil and wickedness in the world; but that line of argument
could be used with equal force against civil government, food
and drink, every faculty and profession, learning, eloquence,
and even against human reason itself. And even those of
your sect who allow themselves to be called Deists, if their
views are thoroughly examined, will be found to include little
religion in them. As for
•God’s providence watching over our conduct and
dispensing blessings or hardships,
•the immortality of the soul,
•the last judgment, and an after-life with rewards and
punishments
—those are great points of natural religion, but how few (if
any) of your free-thinkers have tried to get men to have a
serious sense of them! How many go the opposite way, trying
82
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
to make the belief in them shaky or ridiculous!. . . . When
a man’s declared principles and personal beliefs are utterly
subversive of the things listed above, anything he says about
virtue, piety and religion will be understood as merely playing
safe and not being conspicuous.
Lysicles: Frankly, I have never had any liking for religion of
any kind, revealed or unrevealed [what’s ‘unrevealed’ is ‘natural
religion’]; and I venture to say the same for any gentlemen of
our sect that I am acquainted with, having never known
any of them do anything as low as •use the word ‘God’
with reverence, or •express respect for piety or for any
sort of worship. [He adds details about ways in which a
minute philosopher may talk as though he had respect
for Christianity, explaining that this is never to be taken
seriously and literally. Then:]
28. After all these arguments and ideas that beget one
another without end, here is my view in a nutshell: My
friends and I can’t for the life of us see why man mightn’t
do very well and govern himself without any religion at all.
Brutes do it, and they are thought to be less capable than
men. You say that brutes have instincts, senses, appetites
and passions to steer and conduct them? Well, men have all
those and also have reason that they can consult when they
need to. From these premises my friends and I conclude the
road of human life is well enough lit without religion.
Crito: Brutes don’t have much power ·of thought, and it
is· confined to particular things that are present to the
animal; so they are sufficiently restrained and kept in order
by the force or faculties of other animals and by the skill of
man; and conscience and religion don’t come into this. In
contrast with that, human reason is a faculty of vast extent
and power, especially power to do mischief; and conscience
is a necessary balance to it. And another point: By the
law of their nature, non-human animals are pushed to one
particular end or manner of existence, without inclination
or means either to deviate from that or to go beyond it. But
man has in him a will and higher principle through which
he can pursue different or even contrary ends, and he can
fall short of or exceed the perfection natural to his species in
this world, just as he can either
hand over control to his sensual appetites, thereby
degrading himself into the condition of brutes,
or else,
well-order and improve his mind, thereby upgrading
himself into something resembling an angel.
Man is the only animal with enough understanding to know
his God. What’s the use of this knowledge if it isn’t to ennoble
man, to raise him to a level where he is more like God and
more in touch with God? And what would the good of such
ennoblement be if it ended with this life? And how can
these things happen without religion? But we have already
discussed at great length the topics of vice and virtue, man
and beast, sense and intellect. Lysicles, surely you don’t
want us to go back to where we were three or four days ago?
Lysicles: By no means. I would much rather go forward, and
make an end as soon as possible. But to save us all trouble,
let me tell you once for all that whatever you say you’ll never
persuade me that so many able and agreeable men are in
the wrong, and a pack of snarling sour bigots in the right.
29. Crito: O Lysicles! I don’t look for religion among
•bigots, or for reason among •libertines. Each kind disgrace
their respective positions—•the bigot exerting an angry zeal
for things that hardly matter, and •the libertine paying no
attention to even the plainest and most important truths.
And surely whatever there is that’s silly, narrow and uncharitable
in the bigot, the same is in great measure to be
83
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
attributed to the conceited ignorance and petulant irreligion
of the libertine. . . .
Lysicles ignored this, and rounded on Alciphron. ‘I
have always thought’, he said, ‘that nothing could be sillier
than to think of destroying Christianity by praising natural
religion. You can’t consistently think well of one and poorly
of the other, because it’s obvious that natural religion needs
the help of revealed religion if it is ever to be established
and accepted anywhere except in the brains of a few idle
speculative men. I knew what your concessions would
come to. Anyone with half an eye can see that the belief
in God, virtue, an after-life and such fine notions are the
very basis and corner-stone of the Christian religion. Give
them this foundation to build on, and you’ll soon see what
superstructures our theologians will raise from it. Admit
the truth and importance of those doctrines and you don’t
have to be a conjurer to prove from that the excellence and
usefulness of the Christian religion. And then of course there
must be priests to teach and propagate this useful religion.
And if there are priests,. . . .provision will have to made for
their maintenance, enabling them to perform all their rites
and ceremonies in a decent fashion and to keep their sacred
character respected. And the plain upshot of all this is that
the monarch will ally himself with the priesthood in order
to subdue the people; so we have opened the gates to a
long procession of ecclesiastical evils, priestcraft, hierarchy,
inquisition. We have lost our liberty and property; the nation
has been put to vast expense simply to purchase bridles for
our mouths and saddles for our backs.’
30. He said this with some sharpness of tone, and a
scolding manner. Alciphron was upset, but said nothing,
and showed confusion in his looks.
Crito looked at Euphranor and me with a smile. Then,
looking over at the two philosophers, he said: ‘If you’ll allow
me to intervene to prevent a rupture between old friends and
brethren in opinion, I would remark that in what Lysicles has
just said there is something right and something wrong. It
seems right to assert, as he does, that a real belief in natural
religion will lead a man to approve of revealed religion; but it
is wrong to say that inquisitions, tyranny, and ruin must follow
from this. Your free-thinkers—no offence meant!—seem
to mistake where their strength lies. They imagine strongly,
but reason weakly; they are mighty in exaggeration, but thin
in argument! Isn’t there some way to relieve them from the
terror of that fierce and bloody animal an English parson?
Won’t it be enough to trim his talons without chopping off his
fingers? Then they are such wonderful defenders of •liberty
and •property! [He tells an anti-Pope story to illustrate his
thesis that] we may see every day both things and notions
being attributed to liberty and property that in fact don’t
have, and aren’t meant to have, anything to do with either
of them. Really! Is it impossible for a man to be a Christian
without being a slave; or to be a clergyman without having
the principles of an Inquisitor? I am far from shielding and
justifying the greed for domination or tyrannical power in
ecclesiastics. Some who have been guilty of that have paid
dearly for it, and it is to be hoped they always will. But once
we have calmed the fury and folly of the ambitious bishop,
isn’t it time to look see whether some evil mightn’t come to
the State from a different source—the overflowing zeal of
an independent Whig [i.e. a believer in primitive Christianity who
is opposed to the established Church of England]? I’ll tell you this,
without bothering to prove it: the worst tyranny this nation
ever felt was from the hands of ‘patriots’ of that kind.’
31. Lysicles: I don’t know. ‘Tyranny’ is a harsh word
and is sometimes misapplied. When spirited men with
independent views create a ferment, or make a change in
the State, those who lose by the changes are apt to consider
84
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
things in one light, and those who win to consider them in
another. In the mean time, this is certainly good policy: we
should be sparing with our money, and keep it for better
uses than to spend on the church and religion.
[What follows is a longish discussion of property-rights,
the legal basis for the ownership of land by the church, and
so on. Then:]
32. Lysicles: I can never hope, Crito, to make you think
that my schemes are reasonable. You and I each argue
correctly on our own principles, and we’ll never agree until
we drop our principles, and that can’t be done by reasoning.
We all talk of ‘just’, and ‘right’, and ‘wrong’, and ‘public
good’, and so on. We use the same names, but our notions
and conclusions are very different, perhaps diametrically
opposite; and yet the conclusions on each side may admit
of clear proofs, and be inferred by the same method of
reasoning. For instance, the members of a club I belong
to define man as sociable animal, and so we don’t count as
men the human creatures of whom it can be said that we
prefer their absence to their presence. . . . By this standard
it’s clear that men of pleasure, good-humoured men, and
men of wit are the only human creatures who properly and
truly count as men. Therefore, whatever is conducive to
good incomes for them is for the good of mankind, and
consequently very just and lawful, even though it seems to
bring loss or harm to other creatures; ·I say seems· because
no real harm can be done in respect of life or property to
those who don’t know how to enjoy life and property. We
hold this on the basis of clear and well connected reasoning.
But others may view things in another light, give different
definitions, draw different conclusions, and perhaps regard
as a wart or tumour of human nature what we think to be
the top and flower of the creation. From all which there must
arise a very different system of morals, politics, rights, and
notions.
[Lysicles then swing into a jokey classification of men
that someone invented, in which kinds of men at given the
names of kinds of animals, thus:] According to this system,
the fishes are the men who swim in pleasure. . . . The beasts
are dry, drudging, covetous, rapacious folk and all those
addicted to trouble and business, like oxen and other dry
land animals, which spend their lives in labour and fatigue.
The birds are airy notional men, enthusiasts, projectors,
poets, philosophers and such like. . . . If you ask me which
species of mankind I like best, I answer, the flying fish, i.e.
a man of animal enjoyment with a mixture of whim! Thus
you see we have our creeds and our systems, just as more
solemn folk do; with this difference, that our systems are not
strait-laced [= ‘not strapped on tightly’], but sit easy, to be slipped
off or on as the mood takes us or the occasion serves. And
now I can listen, with the greatest equanimity imaginable, to
my opinions being argued against or refuted.
34. Alciphron: I wish all men were like that. But
you’ll find a sort of men—I needn’t name the sort—that
can’t endure having their opinions examined or their faults
criticized. They are against reason, because reason is against
them. We free-thinkers are all for liberty of conscience. If our
tenets are absurd, we allow them to be freely argued against
and inspected; and by parity of reasoning we might hope to
be allowed the same privilege regarding the opinions of other
men.
Crito: O Alciphron! wares that can’t stand the light are
indeed suspect. So whatever moves you to make this
complaint, I promise you that I never will. Up to now I
have allowed your reason its full scope, and I’ll always do
so in the future. . . . But for the love of truth, be candid
85
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
and don’t spend your strength and our time on matters that
aren’t significant or are irrelevant to our topic or have been
agreed between us. We allow that tyranny and slavery are
bad things; but why should we fear them from the clergy
at this time? We agree that rites and ceremonies aren’t of
central importance in religion: but why should we ridicule
things that in their own nature are not bad and may be good,
and that bear the stamp of supreme authority? I freely admit
that men in theology as well as other subjects get tangled
in useless disputes, and will probably go on doing so till the
end of the world; but why must all the human weakness and
mistakes of clergymen be attributed to wicked designs? Why
indiscriminately abuse their character and their beliefs? Is
this like candour, love of truth, and free-thinking? Granted,
bad temper and ill-breeding can occasionally be found in the
clergy; but aren’t the same faults found in English laymen
who have spent their lives in a secluded rural environment.
I grant that there’s endless futility in the ·works of the·
scholastics, but I deny that a volume of that does as much
harm as a page of minute philosophy. That weak or wicked
men should by favour of the world creep into power and
high positions in the church—there’s nothing surprising
in that, and it is natural to suppose that once they are
in those positions they will behave like themselves. But
through all this it is obvious that what drives them in their
unworthy achievements is not the Gospel but the world, not
the spirit but the flesh, not God but the devil. We don’t
shrink from agreeing that nothing is more infamous than
vice and ignorance in a clergyman, nothing lower than a
hypocrite, more trivial than a pedant, more cruel than an
Inquisitor. But you should agree in your turn, gentlemen,
that nothing is more ridiculous and absurd than for pedantic,
ignorant and corrupt men to throw the first stone at every
shadow of their own defects and vices in other men.
35. Alciphron: When I think about the detestable state of
slavery and superstition, I feel my heart swelling to take in
the utter blessing of independent liberty. This is the sacred
and high privilege, the very life and health of our English
constitution. So you mustn’t be surprised if we, with a
vigilant and searching eye, guard it against the minutest
appearance of evil. You must even allow us to cut around it,
going deep and using a magnifying glass so as better to see
and extirpate every least speck that appears in ·the freedom
that· we are careful to preserve and angry to see threatened.
Crito: As for •unrestricted liberty, I leave that to savages,
who I think are the only ones who have it. But as for •the
reasonable legal liberty of our constitution, I most heartily
and sincerely wish it may to survive and flourish among us
for ever. [He says that any amount of vigilance is justified if
it stops attempts ‘to change our free and gentle government
into a slavish or severe one’; but how, he demands, can one
get out of this any basis for an attack on religion? There
follows an discussion of rights of suppression. Alciphron reports
a magistrate who was so hard-pressed by free-thinkers
that he couldn’t find anything to say in defence of his religion
except that if ten million people inhabiting the same island
wanted to have laws establishing religion in certain ways,
and ten thousand able men publicly sneered at those laws,
the ten million would be entitled to expel the ten thousand
out of the island.]
Euphranor: And what answer would you make to this remark
of the magistrate?
Alciphron: The answer is obvious. By the law of nature,
which is superior to any human institutions, intelligence
and knowledge have a right to command folly and ignorance.
I say that able men have by natural right a dominion over
86
Alciphron George Berkeley Fifth dialogue
fools. . . . This doctrine, however, was never thoroughly
understood until quite recently. [After conversation about a
hard-pressed individual magistrate, Alciphron will now revert to using
‘the magistrate’ in the manner described in a note on page 5, as a kind of
short-hand for ‘the law-making and law-enforcing authorities of the country’.]
A generation back, Hobbes and his followers—though
otherwise very great men—declared in favour of the religion
of the magistrate, probably because they were afraid of the
magistrate; but times have changed, and the magistrate may
now be afraid of us!
[Crito briefly comments on this, and then launches into
an anecdote that starts a brief and inconclusive discussion
of the legal requirement that only professed Christians could
serve on juries. Then:]
Crito: . . . .This much is certain: the Christian reformed
religion is a principal part and corner-stone of our free
constitution; and I really think it is the only thing that
makes us deserve freedom and makes us able to enjoy it.
Freedom is either a blessing or a curse, depending on how
men use it. If our religion were wiped out among us, and
the ideas that are regarded ·by free-thinkers· as prejudices
of a Christian education were erased from the minds of
Britons, it seems to me that the best thing that could then
happen would be the loss of our freedom. A people who
have such restless ambition, such strength of feeling, such
enmity between factions, so much at stake in contests, such
unrestricted licence of speech and press, amid so much
wealth and luxury—the only thing that has so far kept them
from ruin are the ‘hoary old wives’ tales [he uses a Latin phrase,
quoting Persius, as on page 6] that you claim to be wiping out.
36. Under the Christian religion this nation has been
greatly improved. From being a sort of savages, we have
become civilized, polished, and learned. We have made a
decent and noble figure both at home and abroad. And,
as our religion decreases, I am afraid we shall be found to
have declined. So why should we persist in that dangerous
experiment?
Alciphron: One would think, Crito, that you had forgotten
the many calamities caused by churchmen and religion.
Crito: And one would think that you had forgotten what we
said this very day in answer to that objection. I don’t want
to go on for ever saying the same things, so I’ll make just
three points. •If we reflect on the past state of the Christian
world, and especially of our country with our feuds and
factions that existed while we all had the same religion—e.g.
the War of the Roses, so violent and bloody and long—we
may well suspect that the nastiness that has more recently
shown up under the mask of religion would have broken out
under some other pretext if religion hadn’t been available. •It
doesn’t follow from anything you can say about our history
that the evils accidentally arising from religion bear any
proportion to the good effects it has really produced or to
the evils it has prevented. •The best things can accidentally
give rise to evil; and such an accidental effect is not strictly
speaking produced by the good thing itself but by some evil
thing—not a part, property, or effect of it—that happens to
coincide with it. . . .
Alciphron: I think we have given enough discussion to the
topic of today’s session. I must acknowledge that there’s
something in what Crito has said about the usefulness of
the Christian religion. (Lysicles may not like this, but I owe
it to my status as a fair impartial adversary to say this.) I’ll
even admit that some of our sect are in favour of tolerating
Christianity. I remember a meeting of a number of able men
where, after much debate, we passed three resolutions. •The
first was that no religion ought to be tolerated in the State:
87
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
but this on more mature thought was judged impracticable.
•The second was that all religions should be tolerated, but
none looked on with favour except atheism: but it was feared
that this might make trouble among the lower sort of people.
•The third resolution was that some religion or other should
be established for the use of the vulgar. After a long dispute
about which religion this should be, it was proposed that
the present religion might be tolerated until a better one was
found. But while I grant that Christianity is •expedient, I can
never think it •true while there are unanswerable objections
to it. Is it all right if I present those at our next meeting?
To which we all agreed.
Sixth dialogue (Monday)
[In the original work, this is by a considerable margin the longest of
the dialogues; but not in this version, from which much of the philosophically
uninteresting material has been cut.]
[Dion reports that on the Sunday the various people spent
the day in their characteristic ways. Then:] The next morning
we assembled at the same place as on Saturday; and when
we were all seated I remarked that during the preceding
week our discussion had been longer and less interrupted
than I had ever known in town, where men’s hours are
broken by visits, business, and amusements—so much so
that anyone who settles for forming his ideas wholly from
conversation must end up with ideas that are very shattered
and incomplete.
‘And what have we achieved’, replied Alciphron, ‘through
all these continued discussions? For my part, I think that
with regard to the main point that divides us, the truth of
the Christian religion, I’m just where I was at the outset.’
I answered that so many points had been examined,
discussed and agreed between him and his adversaries that
I hoped to see them eventually agreeing on everything. ‘For,
in the first place,’ I said, ‘the principles and opinions of those
who are called free-thinkers, or minute philosophers, have
been pretty clearly explained. It has been also agreed that
vice isn’t beneficial to the nation in the way that some men
imagine it is; that virtue is highly useful to mankind; but that
the beauty of virtue is not enough, on its own, to get men to
be virtuous; that therefore the belief in a God and providence
ought to be encouraged in the State, and tolerated in good
company, as a useful notion. And it has been proved that
there is a God, that it is reasonable to worship him, and that
the worship, faith and principles prescribed by the Christian
religion are a good influence.’
Alciphron’s reply was addressed to Crito: ‘Even if everything
that Dion has just said is true,’ he said, ‘that
doesn’t move me an inch from where I was at the outset
regarding the main point. That’s because nothing in all this
88
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
proves the truth of the Christian religion, though each of
the details Dion has listed might create a prejudice in its
favour. So I must be on my guard against being a prejudiced
person—prejudiced in favour of Christianity. As a lover of
truth, I must look sharp, and consider carefully every step I
take.
2. Crito: You may remember, Alciphron, that you suggested
as today’s topic certain difficulties and objections
that you had to offer against the Christian religion. We are
now ready to hear and consider anything of that kind that
you think fit to produce. Atheism, and the wrong idea of
Christianity as something harmful to mankind, are great
prejudices, and a man’s losing them may make him more
apt to argue with candour and submit to reasonable proof;
but losing prejudices against an opinion (·as you have done·)
isn’t the same as acquiring a prejudice in its favour (·as
you fear you may have done·). So we have reason to hope
that you’ll be able to do justice to your cause without being
uncritically in love with it.
Alciphron: [After a self-congratulatory opening, Alciphron
says that he will do his best to share with ‘those who are
wandering lower down in the narrow dark paths of error’
the view of things that he has achieved from his ‘lofty stand
above the reach of prejudice’. Then:] Know then that each of
the various groups of men has a faith and a religious system
that sprouts from the common grain of enthusiasm that they
all have—a grain that is a basic ingredient in the mix of
human nature. Each group tells of •communication with the
invisible world, •revelations from heaven, •divine oracles, and
the like. When I consider all these claims with an impartial
eye, I can’t possibly assent to them all, and I find within
myself something that restrains me from assenting to any
of them. I’m willing to go where I am led by common sense
and the light of nature; but the same reason that tells me to
yield to rational proof forbids me to accept opinions without
proof. This holds in general against all revelations—all. Let
this be counted as my first objection against the Christian
religion in particular.
Crito: This objection presupposes that there’s no proof or
reason for believing the Christian revelation, so if good reason
can be assigned for such a belief, the objection comes to
nothing. Now, I presume you’ll agree that a true and proper
reason for believing a report is the authority of the person
who makes it; and the better his authority, the sounder the
claim his report has to our assent. Well, now, the authority
of God is on all accounts the best; so it is most reasonable
to believe anything that comes from God, ·meaning anything
that is told to us by God·.
3. Alciphron: I agree; but then you have to prove that it
does come from God.
Crito: And aren’t •miracles, and the •fulfilment of prophecies,
joined with •the excellence of its doctrine, a sufficient proof
that the Christian religion came from God?
Alciphron: Miracles would indeed prove something. But what
proof have we of these miracles?
Crito: Proof of the same kind that we do have—the only
kind we can have—of events that occurred long ago and far
away. We have authentic accounts passed down to us from
eye-witnesses whom we can’t conceive to have been tempted
to deceive us by any human motive whatsoever. ·Why can’t
we?· Because in giving these accounts they were acting
contrary to their interests, their prejudices, and the very
principles in which they had been nursed and brought up.
These accounts were confirmed by the unparalleled razing
of the city of Jerusalem, and the scattering of the Jewish
nation, which is an enduring testimony to the truth of the
89
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
Gospel, particularly of the predictions of our blessed saviour.
[For example: ‘And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies,
then know that the desolation thereof is nigh.’ Luke 21:20] Within
less than a century these accounts were spread throughout
the world, and believed by great numbers of people. They
were also written down, translated into numerous languages,
and handed down with the same respect and consent of
Christians in the most distant churches.
‘Don’t you see’, said Alciphron, staring straight at Crito,
‘that all this depends on tradition? And tradition, believe me,
gives only a weak hold: it is a chain whose first links may be
stronger than steel and yet the last ones weak as wax and
brittle as glass. Imagine a picture copied successively by a
hundred painters, each copying from the one before; how
like the original will the last copy be? How lively and clear
will an image be after a hundred reflections between two
parallel mirrors? That’s how like and lively I think a faint
vanishing tradition will be at the end of sixteen or seventeen
centuries. Some men have a false heart, others a wrong head;
and even when heart and head are both good, memory may
be treacherous. Something gets added, something omitted,
something varied from the truth; and the •cumulative result
of many such additions, deductions and alterations through
the centuries—the •bottom line—is quite different from what
the tradition started with.’
Crito: We can know ancient facts by •oral tradition or written
tradition; and a written tradition may be either •private
(kept in the hands of particular men) or •public (recorded
in public archives). Now, as far as I can see all these three
sorts of tradition agree in attesting to the genuine antiquity
of the Gospels. And they are strengthened by supplementary
evidence from rites instituted, festivals observed, and
buildings—churches, baptistries and sepulchres—put up
by ancient Christians. Granting that your objection holds
against oral tradition on its own, I can’t think it is so difficult
to transcribe faithfully. And once something has been put
in writing, it is secure against slips of memory, and can
with reasonable care be preserved intact for as long as the
manuscript lasts—which we know from experience can be
more than a thousand years. . . . A tradition of more than
sixteen hundred years needs only two or three links in its
chain [he gives an example]; and despite the great length of
time, those links may be very sound and unbroken. And no
reasonable man will deny that an ancient manuscript may
be as credible now as when it was first written. We have
it on good authority—and anyway it seems probable—that
•the first Christians were careful to transcribe copies of
the Gospels and Epistles for their private use; and that
•other copies were preserved as public records in many
churches throughout the world; and that •portions of them
were constantly read in their assemblies. What more could
be said to prove the authenticity of the writings of classic
authors, or ancient records of any kind?
Alciphron turned to Euphranor and said: ‘Silencing an
adversary is different from convincing him—don’t you agree,
Euphranor?’
Euphranor: Oh yes, they are different.
Alciphron: But what I want is to be convinced.
Euphranor: It’s not so clear to me that you do!
Alciphron: Look, however willing a man is to be convinced,
he can’t be convinced by •probable arguments when there is
a •demonstration going the other way.
Euphranor: I agree that he can’t.
4. Alciphron: Well, it is as obvious as demonstration can
make it that no divine faith can possibly be built on tradition.
Take the case of an honest credulous farmer who is drilled
and lectured every Sunday by his parish priest. Clearly it’s
90
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
the parson he believes in, not God. All he knows about
revelations, doctrines and miracles is what the priest tells
him. He believes all this, and his faith is purely human. If
you say he has the liturgy and the Bible as foundation for his
faith, the difficulty still recurs. As regards the liturgy, he pins
his faith on the civil magistrate as well as the ecclesiastic
one, and neither of those can claim divine inspiration. As
for the Bible, he takes both that and his prayer-book on
trust from the printer, who he believes made true editions
from true copies. So faith is at work here, but faith in what?
Faith in the priest, in the magistrate, in the printer, editor,
transcriber, none of whom can possibly be claimed to be
divine. I had the hint for this argument from Cratylus; it’s
an arrow out of his quiver—a sharp one.
Euphranor: Let me get hold of this arrow and try it out for
myself. Suppose that your farmer hears a magistrate declare
the law from the bench, or suppose he reads it in a statute
book. Do you think that the magistrate or the printer is the
true and proper object of his faith and submission? Or do
you acknowledge a higher authority on which their official
actions are based? Again, if you read a passage in ·the
Roman historian· Tacitus that you believe to be true, would
you say you assented to it on the authority of the printer or
transcriber rather than the historian?
Alciphron: Maybe, maybe not. I don’t think I’m obliged to
answer these questions. All you are doing is to transfer
the question from one subject to another. What we were
discussing was not law or non-religious history, but religious
tradition and divine faith. I can see well enough which way
you are heading, but I’ll never accept that you can solve one
difficulty by starting up another.
Crito: O Alciphron! You expect others to ‘stay fair and
stand firm’ (as you chose to express it [on page 6]) while you
pluck out their prejudices; but you elude our grasp at every
turn. How can Euphranor argue with you if not from your
concessions, and how can he know what they are unless you
tell him?
Euphranor: . . . .My question admits of only two answers:
take your pick. (1) From one of the answers it will follow that
by a parity of reason we can easily conceive how a man can
have divine faith without ever feeling inspiration or seeing
a miracle. That is because it is equally possible for a mind
to which divine revelation has come by some channel—oral
or scriptural—to carry its thought and submission back
up that channel to the source, ending up with faith not in
•human but in •divine authority, its proper and true object
being not •the mechanisms and agents of the channel but
rather •the great origin itself. (2) From the other answer it
will follow that you’re introducing a general scepticism into
human knowledge, and smashing the hinges on which civil
government, and all the affairs of the world turn; in short,
you’ll destroy •human faith in order to get rid of •divine.
I leave it to you to consider how well this goes with your
announcement that you want to be convinced.
5. Alciphron: I really would be glad to be convinced
one way or other—to come to some conclusion. But I
have so many objections in store that you shouldn’t attach
much weight to your dealing with one of them. Depend
on it, you’ll find me behaving like a gentleman and a lover
of truth. I’ll state my objections briefly and plainly, and
accept reasonable answers as fast as you can give them.
Come on, Euphranor, make the best case you can for your
tradition. You can never present as a constant and universal
tradition one that is admitted to have been unknown, or at
best disputed, in the Church for several centuries; and this
is the case with the New Testament. For though we now
91
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
have a settled ‘canon’—·meaning that the church hierarchy
eventually decided which books should be included in the
New Testament and which should not·—everyone must see
and admit that a tradition can’t grow stronger by age; and
that anything that was uncertain in the earliest Christian
times can’t be undoubted later on. What do you say to this,
Euphranor?
Euphranor: I’d like to get clearer about your meaning before I
give an answer. This objection of yours seems to presuppose
that a tradition that has been constant and undisputed
may be admitted as a proof, but that where the tradition is
defective the proof must be so too. Is this your meaning?
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: So the Gospels and the Epistles of St. Paul,
which were universally accepted from the start and have
never since been doubted of by the Church, must be accepted
as genuine. And since these books contain all those points
that are in controversy between you and me, I don’t need
to argue with you about the authority of other books of the
New Testament that didn’t come to be generally known and
accepted in the Church until later? Someone who assents
to the undisputed books is no longer an unbeliever, even
if he doesn’t regard the book of Revelation or the Epistles
of St. James or St. Jude or St. Peter, or the last two
Epistles of St. John as deserving to be in the canon. The
additional authority of these portions of the Bible may carry
weight in particular controversies between Christians, but
it can’t add anything to arguments against an unbeliever as
such. . . . When you are a Christian it will be time enough
to argue about •the status of those books. And you’ll be
nearer to being Christian if your way there is shortened by
the omission of •that question for the present.
Alciphron: Not as near as you may think! Despite all the
fair and plausible things you may say about tradition, when
I consider •the spirit of forgery that reigned in primitive
times, and reflect on •the many Gospels, Acts, and Epistles
that were attributed to the apostles and then came to be
recognized as spurious, I confess that I can’t help suspecting
the whole Bible.
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, do you suspect that all Plato’s
writings are spurious because the Dialogue on Death is
agreed to be so? Won’t you accept any of Cicero’s writings
as genuine because Sigonius passed off a book that he
had written as Cicero’s De Consolatione, and the deception
succeeded for some time?
Alciphron: Suppose I admit as genuine the works of Cicero
and Plato that are commonly accepted as genuine. What
then?
Euphranor: Why then I would want to know whether it’s
balanced and impartial in a free-thinker to measure the credibility
non-religious and sacred books by different standards.
Let us know what we Christians are allowed to work with
when we argue with minute philosophers; are we allowed the
benefit of common maxims in logic and criticism? If so, then
please give a reason why
writings which in the style and manner and matter
bear visible signs of being fraudulent, and have accordingly
been rejected by the Church
can be used as an argument against
writings that have been universally accepted, and
handed down by a unanimous constant tradition.
I don’t know of anything truly valuable that hasn’t been
counterfeited; so your argument has a universal scope; but
something that tells against everything doesn’t hold against
anything. . . . It would seem as •silly to reject the genuine
writings of non-religious authors because of the fakes as it
92
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
would be •unreasonable to suppose that the heretics and
the many sects of Christians wouldn’t have included anyone
capable of that kind of deceit.
Alciphron: I see no way of judging this: at such a great
distance of time it is all dark and doubtful—mere guess-work.
[Crito intervenes with a list of the reasons there are to
trust the judgments of the Church Councils about what is
spurious and what genuine. Alciphron then moves to a new
point: the Bible is not well enough written to have been divinely
inspired. Euphranor says that that’s not decisive; even
an earthly monarch leaves the detailed wording of his laws
and proclamations ‘to his secretaries and clerks to express
his sense in their own words’. Also, some roughness of style
matches the roughness we find in •large-scale nature—for
example there is never a really straight shore-line—though
we do find geometrically exact shapes ‘in the •works of insects’.
So it seems that a ‘scrupulous attention to what men
call the rules of art is not observed in the big productions of
the author of nature’. Alciphron replies that that’s all right
as regards niceties of grammar and expression, but he still
counts it against the ‘divine inspiration’ idea that so much
of the Bible is written in a flat, characterless, boring way.
Euphranor explodes:]
Euphranor: O Alciphron, if I dared to follow my own judgment
I would be apt to think there are noble beauties in
the style of the Bible: in the narrative parts a simple and
unaffected manner; in the devotional and prophetic parts an
animated and sublime style; and in the doctrinal parts such
an air of dignity and authority as seems to declare that their
origin is divine. But I shan’t. . . .set up my judgment on such
a delicate matter against that of the wits and men of genius
who are so plentiful in your sect. Nor am I tempted to do so,
because it seems to me that ·this latest argument of yours is
worthless anyway·: something isn’t shown not be the oracle
of God by being delivered in a plain dress rather than in the
enticing words of man’s wisdom.
Alciphron: This may perhaps work as a defence of some
simplicity and carelessness in writing.
7. But what defence can there be for nonsense, crude
nonsense? I could easily give many examples, because I
once read the Bible the whole way through looking for them.
Look at the 49th Psalm in this Bible that I have here: the
author begins very grandly, calling on all the inhabitants
of the earth to listen, and assuring them that his mouth
will speak of wisdom, and the meditation of his heart will
be of understanding. . . . But he has no sooner finished this
preface than he puts this senseless question, ‘Wherefore
should I fear in the days of evil, when the wickedness of my
heels shall compass me about?’ The wickedness of my heels!
What nonsense after such a solemn introduction!
Euphranor: I have naturally weak eyes, and many things
that I can’t see are clearly seen by others. So I don’t
conclude that a thing is absolutely invisible because I can’t
see it. Well, it may be with my understanding the way it
is with my eyes; so I don’t venture to declare a thing to
be nonsense because I don’t understand it. [He then goes
through several interpretations that have been suggested
for the passage—treating it as some kind of metaphor, or as
involving a Hebrew idiom that we don’t have in English. Crito
chimes in with boring anecdotes about foreigners who have
been misled by English idioms. Then Euphranor resumes:]
In this very psalm that you have picked on, I should have
thought that the good sense and morality contained in what
follows ·the obscure bit· would make a fair-minded reader
judge favorably concerning the original sense of the author
in the part that he couldn’t understand. Tell me, Alciphron,
93
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
when you are reading the classics and encounter something
that you can’t make sense of, do you immediately conclude
that it is nonsense?
Alciphron: By no means; we have to expect difficulties to
arise from different idioms, old customs, hints and allusions
that may be clear at one time or place and obscure at
another.
Euphranor: Then why won’t you judge ·passages of· the
Bible by the same rule? The sources of obscurity that you
mention are all common both to religious and non-religious
writings; and there’s no doubt that in both sorts of writing the
difficulties would vanish if we had a more detailed knowledge
of the languages and circumstances. [He gives an example—a
phrase in the book of Jeremiah that looks odd unless one
knows certain things about life near the river Jordan.]
Alciphron: Here and there a difficult passage may be cleared
up; but there are many that can’t be explained away by any
exercise of human skill or ingenuity. What do you say you
about the discoveries that some of our learned writers have
made, of false citations from the Old Testament found in the
New Testament?
Euphranor: Some New Testament citations of passages in
the Old Testament aren’t exactly accurate; this has been
known for centuries by Christian writers—it isn’t a new
discovery by minute philosophers. It can be explained by
errors of transcription, and is of no great importance. [He
develops this reply at some length, concluding:] What can
you infer from all this, except that the design of the Bible
was not to give us exact knowledge of every detail, and that
the ·Holy· Spirit didn’t dictate every particle and syllable,
and miraculously preserve them from even the slightest
alteration? [Alciphron renews his attack on the Bible’s style,
and Euphranor renews his defence. Then:]
Alciphron: It wouldn’t be a problem for me to admit that
a popular incorrect style might serve the general ends of
revelation as well as a more precise and exact one. But I
can’t get over the obscurity. If the supreme Being had spoken
to man, it seems to me, he would have spoken clearly, and
the Word of God wouldn’t need commentaries.
8. Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) You seem to
think that obscurity is a defect; but if it turns out not to
be one, that will be the end of this objection of yours. (ii)
Now, speech and style are instrumental in the conveying of
thoughts and notions, in getting knowledge, opinion, and
assent. (iii) And the perfection of an instrument should
be measured by the use for which it is intended. (iv) So
something that is a defect in one instrument may be no
defect in another. For instance, edged tools are in general
designed to cut; but because the uses of an axe and a razor
are different, it’s not a defect in an axe that it isn’t as sharp
as a razor, or in the razor that it isn’t as strong and heavy
as an axe. (v) So we can say in general that any instrument
is perfect if it suits the purpose or intention of the person
who uses it. (vi) From which it seems to follow that no man’s
speech is defective in clearness if
•it isn’t intelligible to all men, but is intelligible enough
to the ones the speaker intended should understand
it; or if
•it isn’t equally clear in all parts, or doesn’t convey
perfect knowledge all through, but does convey an
imperfect hint, which is all the speaker intended.
(vii) So we need to know the intention of the speaker if we
are to know whether his style is obscure through defect or
design. (viii) But no one man can possibly know all the ends
and purposes of God’s revelations.
So for all you know to the contrary, the obscurity of some
94
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
parts of the Bible may fit quite well with a purpose that
you don’t know, in which case they aren’t evidence that the
Bible doesn’t come from God. The books of the Bible were
written in ancient languages, at distant times, on various
occasions, and on very different subjects. Doesn’t that make
it reasonable to think that some parts or passages might
have been clearly enough understood by those for whose use
they were principally designed, and yet seem obscure to us,
who speak another language and live at another time? Is
it at all absurd or unsuitable to our ideas of God and man
to suppose that God may reveal, but be reserved about how
much he reveals on certain remote and sublime subjects,
content to give us hints and glimpses rather than ·clear·
views? May we not also suppose, as something reasonable
and suggested by the analogy of nature, that some points
that could have been more clearly explained were left obscure
merely to encourage our diligence and modesty?—two virtues
which, if it wouldn’t seem disrespectful to such great men, I
would recommend to the minute philosophers.
Lysicles replied, ‘This indeed is excellent! You expect that
men of sense and spirit should in great humility put out their
eyes, and blindly swallow all the absurdities and nonsense
that are offered to them as divine revelation.’
Euphranor: On the contrary, I want them to open their
eyes, look sharply, and try the spirit [Berkeley’s phrase] to see
whether it is of God; rather than passively and ignorantly
condemning all religions together. . . . If they would
•compare the Christian system. . . .with other claimants
to divine revelation,
•consider impartially the doctrines, precepts, and
events contained in Christianity,
•weigh them in the balance against any other religious,
natural, moral or historical accounts, and
•examine diligently all the proofs, internal and external,
that for so many ages have been able to influence and
persuade so many wise, learned, and inquiring men,
they might find in Christianity certain special features that
sufficiently distinguish it from all other religions and supposed
revelations, as a basis for a reasonable faith. If that
happened, I leave it to the minute philosophers to consider
whether they are right to take a revelation so distinguished
and attested and dismiss it with impatient scorn because
some parts of it are obscure. [He returns to the topic of
obscurity in texts written in an ancient foreign language, the
likelihood that we won’t know all the idioms and so on, and
repeats his plea for judging religious writings in the same
manner as non-religious ones.]
Alciphron: You may lecture and expound, but nothing you
have said or can say alters the fact that ‘a revelation that
doesn’t reveal’ is a mere contradiction in terms.
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, don’t you accept that the
light of the sun is the most glorious production of Providence
in this natural world?
Alciphron: Suppose I do.
Euphranor: Well, this light that you can’t deny was made by
God •shines only on the surface of things, •doesn’t shine
in the night, •shines imperfectly in the twilight, •is often
interrupted, refracted and obscured, •represents distant
things and small things dubiously, imperfectly, or not at all.
Isn’t all this true?
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: Doesn’t it follow that to expect in this world a
constant, uniform light from God, without any mixture of
shade or mystery, would be to depart from the rule and
analogy of the creation? and that therefore it’s wrong to
argue that the light of revelation is not divine because it’s
95
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
not as so clear and full as you expect, or because it doesn’t
shine equally at all times and in all places?
Alciphron: Because I claim to be fair and unbiased in this debate,
I have to admit that you say some plausible things—as
a man of argument will always be able to do in vindication of
his prejudices.
9. But I should come into the open and tell you, once for
all, that however much you question and answer, illustrate
and enlarge, you won’t convince me that the Christian
religion is divinely revealed. ·In support of this attitude·
I have said several things, and have many more to say, that
carry weight not only with myself but with many great men
who are good friends of mine; and they won’t stop carrying
weight, no matter what Euphranor says on the other side.
Euphranor: I envy you the happiness of knowing such people!
I can’t have that advantage, living as I do in this out-of-theway
place; so I have to make the most of this opportunity
that you and Lysicles have put into my hands. I regard you
as two able physicians, and you were pleased to consider me
as a patient whom you have generously undertaken to cure.
Now, a patient must be completely free to explain his case
and report all his symptoms, because concealing a symptom
might prevent a perfect cure. So please understand me not
as •objecting to or arguing against either your skill or your
medicines, but only as •reporting on my condition and on the
effects your medicines have on me. Alciphron, didn’t you give
me to understand that you would wipe out my prejudices?
Alciphron: It is true: a good physician eradicates every fibre
of the disease. Come, you shall have a patient hearing.
Euphranor: Tell me, didn’t Plato believe that God inspired
particular men, as organs or trumpets, to proclaim and
sound forth his oracles to the world? And wasn’t the same
opinion also embraced by other great writers of antiquity?
Crito: Socrates seems to have thought that all true poets
spoke by inspiration; and Cicero held that there was no
extraordinary genius without it. . . .
Alciphron: What would you infer from this?
Euphranor: I would infer that inspiration shouldn’t seem
impossible or absurd, but rather agreeable to the light of
reason and the notions of mankind. You’ll agree with this,
I suppose, because you have made it an objection against
one particular revelation that there are so many claims to
revelation throughout the world.
[Alciphron replies with a dig at the word ‘inspire’. It
comes, he rightly says, from Latin meaning ‘to breathe or
blow in’, so it should be applied to mere ‘wind or vapour’ and
not to big truths. Euphranor sharply takes this up, pointing
out that Alciphron is willing to say that he ‘discourses’ while
sitting down, and yet ‘discourse’ comes from Latin meaning
‘run about’. Alciphron defends his use of ‘discourse’ in the
obvious way, and Euphranor cashes in on that:]
Euphranor: May we not as well conceive that the term
‘inspiration’ might be borrowed from sensible things, to
stand for God’s action when in an extraordinary manner
he influences, arouses and enlightens the mind of a prophet
or an apostle?. . . . ·Let’s drop the silly point about ‘blowing
in’, and get back to our real topic·. When we look into
our own minds, it seems to me, we plainly perceive certain
instincts, impulses and tendencies that from time to time
spring up unaccountably in our souls. . . . This is •ordinary
and •natural; but why can’t we conceive it possible for the
human mind, for an •extraordinary reason, to be moved in
an •extraordinary manner, having its faculties stirred up and
kicked into action by a •supernatural power? [He admits
that there have been and will be wild visions and morbid
ravings, but that doesn’t mean that there aren’t also genuine
96
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
inspirations. We can’t rule out the possibility that a true
prophet or inspired person can distinguish divine inspiration
from mentally unbalanced imagination as easily as we can
distinguish sleeping from waking. He quotes the book of
Jeremiah to that effect.]
10. Alciphron: I see no need to deny that inspirations
and revelations are possible. Make the best you can of this
concession.
Euphranor: Well, if something is allowed as possible, we are
entitled to suppose that it is fact.
Alciphron: We are.
Euphranor: Let us then suppose that God chose to make a
revelation to men, and that he inspired some men as a means
to instruct others. Having supposed this, can you deny that
their inspired discourses and revelations might have been
committed to writing, or that the written versions might in
the course of time become obscure in many places, that
some of them might even have been less clear than others
at the outset, or that they might get altered by frequent
transcribing, as other writings are known to have done? Isn’t
it even very probable that all these things would happen?
Alciphron: I grant it.
Euphranor: Well, then, how can you defend your claim that
the Bible is not divine because of facts about it that you now
acknowledge would probably accompany any divine revelation
transmitted down to us through so many centuries?
Alciphron: [He concedes the point about small blemishes
that might arise from copying errors etc. But:] I defy the
wit of man to invent anything more extravagant than the
accounts the Bible gives of
1 apparitions,
2 devils,
3 miracles,
4 God manifest in the flesh,
5 being born again,
6 grace,
7 self-denial,
8 resurrection of the dead,
and such-like sick dreams—things so odd, unaccountable,
and remote from human understanding that you have no
more chance of clearing them of the charge of absurdity than
you have of making a black man white by washing him. No
critical skill can justify them, no tradition can recommend
them—even as inventions of competent men, let alone as
divine revelations.
Euphranor: I always had a great opinion of your wisdom,
Alciphron, but now I consider you as something more than
man; how otherwise could you know what it may be proper
for God to reveal? [This is, of course, a sneer.] I don’t think
it is insulting to the greatest of human understandings to
suppose that they are ignorant of many things that aren’t
suited to their faculties or lie out of their reach. Even the
plans of princes often lie beyond the ken of their subjects,
who can only know what is revealed to them by those at
the helm, and are often unqualified to judge concerning the
usefulness and likely consequences even of what they are
allowed to know, until in due course the scheme unfolds
and is explained by the course of events. Of course many
things contained in the Bible are remote from the common
understanding of mankind; but I don’t see that it follows
from this that they didn’t come from divine revelation. On
the contrary, doesn’t it seem reasonable to suppose that a
revelation from God would contain something different in
kind, or more excellent in degree, than anything that lies
within the grasp of humans, even of the wisest philosopher?
Accounts of separate spirits (good or bad), prophecies, miracles
etc. are undoubtedly strange; but I don’t see how you
97
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
can prove them to be impossible or absurd.
Alciphron: Some things are so evidently absurd that it would
be almost as silly to disprove them as to believe them; and I
take these—·the ones I listed a moment ago·—to be of that
sort.
11. Euphranor: Isn’t it possible that some men show
as much •prejudice and narrowness in •rejecting all such
accounts as others might show •slackness and credulity in
•accepting them?. . . . I can’t understand why anyone who
admits the union of the soul with the body should declare it
impossible for (4) the human nature to be united to the divine
in some way that can’t be described or grasped by reason.
Nor can I see any absurdity in (5) the idea that sinful man
may be born again, may become a new creature, by (6) the
grace of God reclaiming him from a carnal life to a spiritual
life of virtue and holiness. And since being governed by sense
and appetite is contrary to the happiness and perfection of a
rational creature, I don’t in the least wonder that we are told
to exercise (7) self-denial. As for (8) the resurrection of the
dead, I don’t regard that as so very contrary to the analogy
of nature, when I see •plants that have been left to rot in the
earth rise up again with new life and vigour, or •a worm that
appears to be dead change its nature so that something that
at first crawled on the earth becomes a new species and flies
around with wings. And when I consider that the soul and
body are things of such utterly different kinds, I can’t see
any reason to be positive that the soul must necessarily be
extinguished when the body falls to pieces; especially since I
find in myself a strong natural desire for immortality, and
I haven’t observed that natural appetites are given in vain,
given merely to be frustrated. You regard certain things as
extravagant and absurd, but I shan’t agree with that until I
see good reason for it.
12. Crito: No, Alciphron, your positive airs mustn’t be
regarded as proofs; and we won’t think things are contrary to
common sense just because you say so. By ‘common sense’
we ought to mean either •the general sense of mankind or
•the improved reason of thinking men. Now, I believe that all
those articles you have so powerfully and vividly summed up
and exploded can be shown to be consistent with, and even
in harmony with, ‘common sense’ in one or other of these
senses. That the gods might (1) appear and converse among
men and that (4) the Divinity might inhabit human nature
were things that the heathens believed. . . . And though
(2) the notion of a Devil may not be so obvious or so fully
described, there are plain traces of it in several traditions.
[He cites ancient Greeks, Chaldeans, and Egyptians; and
reports that a text as early as Homer contains something that
Cardinal Bessarion has identified as an allusion to the fall of
Satan. Then many more classical references, in connection
with the ‘other articles’ on Alciphron’s list, apparently with
(6) grace uppermost, though it isn’t mentioned by name.
Winding up:] Any man who really thinks has only to look at
what other thinking men have thought—men who can’t be
supposed to be prejudiced in favour of revealed religion—and
he’ll see cause, if not •to think with reverence of the Christian
doctrines of grace, self-denial, rebirth, sanctification and
the rest, at least •to judge more modestly and cautiously
than someone who confidently declares them absurd and in
conflict with the reason of mankind. . . .
[Lysicles says that none of this has the slightest appeal
him, and that if this makes anyone think he is ignorant ‘I
am happy and safe in my ignorance’. Crito says ‘Perhaps not
so safe’, which he and backs up thus:]
Crito: Mere ignorance isn’t a crime. But willful ignorance,
98
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
deliberate ignorance, ignorance from laziness, or conceited
ignorance is a fault—we have the testimony of heathen
writers as proof of that; and it doesn’t need proof to show that
if ignorance is a fault then we can’t be secure in ignorance
as an excuse.
Lysicles: Honest Crito seems to hint that man should take
care to inform himself while alive, so that his neglect to do
so won’t be punished when he is dead. . . . The best way
to get a gentleman to keep on with something is to try to
frighten him out of it. This is the stale and absurd tactic that
priests use, making them and their religion more odious and
contemptible to me than all the other items put together. . . .
That hell-and-eternal-punishment thing is the most absurd
as well as the nastiest thought that ever entered into the
head of mortal man.
Crito: But you must admit that it isn’t an exclusively Christian
absurdity, because Socrates, that great free-thinker of
Athens, thought it probable that impious men are punished
for ever in hell. It is reported of this same Socrates that he
was often known to think for twenty-four hours at a stretch,
fixed in the same position and wrapped up in meditation.
Lysicles: Our modern free-thinkers are men of a more lively
sort. Those old philosophers were most of them insecure. I
think they had a narrow, timid way of thinking that falls far
short of the frank spirit of our times.
Crito: But if a man doesn’t know the nature of the soul,
how can reason give him any assurance about whether it is
mortal or immortal?. . . .
Lysicles: But what if I do know the nature of the soul? I
have been taught that whole secret by a modern free-thinker,
a man of science who discovered the nature of the soul not
by •a tiresome looking into himself, or by •getting himself
confused in a labyrinth of notions, or by •stupidly thinking
for whole days and nights together, but by looking into things
and observing the analogy of nature.
14. This great man is a tried and tested scientist who has
conducted many experiments on plants. He holds that men
and plants are really of the same species; that animals are
moving plants, and plants are fixed animals; that the mouths
of animals have the same use as the roots of plants; that
blossoms and flowers correspond to the private parts of the
human body; that plant and animal bodies are both organic,
and both have life, which is a certain motion and circulation
of juices through the appropriate tubes or vessels. . . . The
soul, he says, is the specific form or source from which
come the distinct qualities or properties of things. We start
with plants, because they are simpler than animals and
thus easier to analyse. The soul of any plant—rosemary, for
example—is nothing more or less than its essential oil. This
is the source of its special fragrance, taste, and medicinal
virtues—i.e. its life and operations. Use chemical techniques
to separate or extract this essential oil and you get the •soul
of the plant, what’s left behind being a •dead carcass that
doesn’t have a single property or power of the plant. . . . This
essential oil is an oily substance with a fine subtle element or
volatile salt imprisoned in it. Strictly speaking, this volatile
salt is the essence of the plant’s soul, containing all its
powers; and the oil is the vehicle of this most subtle part of
the soul, the part that fixes and individuates it. And just as
the plant dies when separated from this oil, so the soul dies
when this essential oil is split up into its elements, as you
can see by leaving it exposed for some time to the open air,
so that the volatile salt or spirit can fly off; after which the
oil remains dead and tasteless, not perceptibly weighing any
less but having lost that volatile essence of the soul, that
ethereal aura, that spark of existence, which returns and
mixes with the solar light, the universal soul of the world,
99
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
and the only source of life. I’m talking about all life—of
plants, lower animals, and thinking animals, which differ
only according to the fineness of organization of their bodies.
This chemical system lets you at once into the nature
of the soul, and accounts for all its phenomena. In the
compound that is called ‘man’, the soul or essential oil is
what commonly goes by the name of ‘animal spirit’ [see note
on page 53]; for chemists do now agree that ·animal· spirits
are nothing but the more subtle oils. Now, in proportion as
the essential oil of the plant we call ‘man’ is •more subtle
than that of other plants, the volatile salt that impregnates
it is •more free to act; and that explains the properties
and actions of humans that distinguish them from lower
creatures. [He gives some examples.]
Euphranor: O Lysicles! your ingenious friend has opened up
a new scene, and explained the most obscure and difficult
points in the clearest and easiest manner.
Lysicles: This account of things struck my fancy, I must
admit. I’m no great lover of creeds or systems; but when a
notion is reasonable and based on experience I know how to
value it.
Crito: Really seriously, Lysicles, do you believe this account
to be true?
[In the next exchange, ‘the artist’ and ‘his art’ mean, roughly, ‘the expert’
and ‘the field in which he is an expert’.]
Lysicles: Really seriously I don’t know whether I do or not.
But I can assure you that the ingenious artist himself hasn’t
the least doubt about it. And Believe an artist in his art is a
sound bit of advice and a short way to knowledge.
Crito: But what does the soul of man have to do with the
chemical art? The same reason that tells me to trust a
skillful artist •in his art inclines me to suspect him when he
is •out of his art. Men are too apt to reduce unknown things
to the standard of what they know, and bring a prejudice
or slant from things they have been familiar with in making
judgments about things with which they have not been
familiar. I have known a violinist solemnly teach that the
soul is harmony; a geometrician very positive that the soul
must be extended; and a physician, who, having pickled half
a dozen embryos and dissected a few rats and frogs, became
very sure of himself and affirmed that there is no soul at all.
[Lysicles declines to argue, saying in effect ‘There’s the
theory, take it or leave it’, which Euphranor ironically describes
as ‘said like a gentleman’. Then he asks whether
the maxim about believing an artist in his art applies to
clergymen. Lysicles says No. Why not? Because he (Lysicles)
knows as much about religious matters as the clergy do. All
men of good sense are competent judges of those matters.]
Euphranor: What! are •God’s attributes and his treatment of
mankind, •the true end and happiness of rational creatures,
and •the means of improving and perfecting their beings—are
these more easy and obvious matters than the ones to which
ordinary ·secular· studies are devoted?
Lysicles: Perhaps not; but I do know this—some things are
so obviously absurd that no authority will make me give in
to them. For instance, if all mankind tried to convince me
that
the Son of God was born on earth in a poor family, was
spat upon, beaten and crucified, lived like a beggar
and died like a thief,
I wouldn’t believe a word of it. Common sense shows
everyone how an earthly prince or ambassador can decently
appear; and the Son of God coming as an ambassador from
heaven must make an appearance that is much greater than
that, and is in all respects the very reverse of that which
Jesus Christ is reported—even by his own historians—to
100
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
have made. . . .
Crito: Do you think, Lysicles, that if a man entered London
in a rich suit of clothes, with a hundred gilt coaches and a
thousand laced footmen, this would be a more divine and
truly grand appearance than if he had power with a word to
heal all kinds of diseases, to raise the dead to life, and calm
storms at sea?
Lysicles: Oh, I’m sure it is very agreeable to common sense
to suppose that he could restore others to life but couldn’t
save his own! You tell us of course that he rose again from
the dead; but what was the point of his dying in the first
place—the just dying for the unjust, the Son of God dying for
wicked men? And why precisely there? Why exactly then?
Why didn’t he appear earlier, and preach in all parts of the
world, so that the benefit was spread wider and more evenly?
Account for all these points, and reconcile them, if you can,
to the common notions and plain sense of mankind.
[Crito replies with two points. •One is that some of
Lysicles’ questions are boorish and ill-mannered. Benevolent
acts aren’t usually scrutinized as carefully as other acts:
‘Who but a minute philosopher would, on a gratuitous
distribution of favours, ask “Why now rather than earlier?”’
•Lysicles should face the fact that he is out of his depth; none
of us know nearly enough to be entitled to form judgments
on what it would have been reasonable for God to do. There
are several pages of this. •You can’t judge the parts of
a machine without knowing how the whole thing works.
•Lysicles says that some things can be seen at first glance to
be so cruel and unjust that they are obviously unworthy
of God; to which Crito replies that we should take into
account (à propos of how badly God treated the Egyptians)
how badly the Egyptians had treated the Israelites, and also
(repeated) that caution in judgment is appropriate when we
know that we don’t have all the facts. •Euphranor has a
Q&A argument making the point that children often don’t
understand—and may even resent—actions by their parents
that are entirely for their own good. He likens this to Lysicles’
attitude to actions by God. •The topic of the ancients versus
the free-thinking moderns comes up again. In the course
of it, Alciphron says that ‘the present times, gray and hoary
with age and experience, have a manifest advantage over
those that are falsely called “ancient”’ (the point being that
in ‘ancient’ times the world was younger than it is now). He
continues:] I tell you in plain English, Euphranor, we don’t
want your revelations, for this plain reason: those that are
clear were already known to everyone, and no-one gets any
benefit from those that are obscure.
Euphranor: Just as it’s impossible for anyone to believe
the practical principles of the Christian religion and not be
the better for them, so it is obvious that those principles
may be much more easily •taught as articles of faith than
•demonstrated or discovered as doctrines of science [here =
‘high-grade theoretical knowledge’]. . . . We see all the time that
many are instructed in matters of faith, few are taught by
scientific demonstration, and fewer still can discover truth
for themselves. I wish that minute philosophers would reflect
on some facts relating to the natural or civil concerns of the
world (·with religion not coming into it·), namely:
•how rarely men are swayed or governed by mere
reasoning, and how often by faith;
•how little they know, and how much they believe;
•how uncommon it is to meet with a man who argues
soundly, who really is a master of reason, or walks by
that rule;
•how much better qualified men are to judge concerning
facts than concerning reasonings, to receive truth
on testimony than to deduce it from principles;
101
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
•how general a spirit of trust or reliance runs through
the whole system of life and opinion; and at the same
time
•how seldom the dry light of unprejudiced nature is
followed or to be found!
If our thinking men would only give thought to these things,
they might find it hard to produce a good reason why faith,
which has so great a share in everything else, should have
no place in religion. [Re ‘dry light’, see note on page 136.]
[He then replies to the ‘were already known to everyone’
part of what Alciphron has just said, by saying that obviously
they weren’t. Perhaps they could have been known, but
revelation is useful if it reveals something that men haven’t
taken the trouble to know, even if they could have known
it. Alciphron then moves to a complaint against prophecies,
namely that they are very obscure. Euphranor replies that
some are obscure while some are not; which is pretty much
what should be expected, given the way the world is and
the way men are. Alciphron in reply refers to the scepticism
about prophecies of free-thinking experts on these matter,
and Euphranor responds to that somewhat sneeringly, and
remarks that the Christians have their experts too. After
a further exchange of insults, Euphranor offers some explanations
of why certain prophecies are unclear—to us
at this time. Looking back in time, we can see ‘a certain
progress from darker to lighter’ in religious matters, so we
can reasonably expect that ‘future events will clear up such
points as at present exercise the faith of believers’. Alciphron
now drops prophecies and turns to something else:]
21. Alciphron: . . . .I want now to examine your religion
by. . . .comparing the system of revelation with collateral
accounts of ancient heathen writers, and showing how much
it clashes with them. The Christian revelation presupposes
the Jewish religion, so if the Jewish one is destroyed the
Christian one must of course fall to the ground with it. I am
going to go the short way, by attacking this Jewish revelation
head-on.
Tell me, if we believe the Mosaic account of things [i.e. the
first five books of the Old Testament], don’t we have to hold that
the world was created not quite six thousand years ago?
Euphranor: Yes, we do.
Alciphron: What will you say now if other ancient records
carry the history of the world back many thousand years
beyond this period? What if the Egyptians and Chinese have
accounts extending to thirty or forty thousand years? What if
the Egyptians have observed twelve hundred eclipses during
the space of forty-eight thousand years? What if the Chinese
have also many observations antecedent to the Jewish
account of the creation? What if the Chaldeans had been
observing the stars for more than four hundred thousand
years? And what shall we say if we have successions of kings
and their reigns, marked for several thousand years before
the beginning of the world assigned by Moses? Shall we
reject the accounts and records of all other nations—the most
famous, ancient and learned in the world—and preserve a
blind reverence for ·Moses·, the legislator of the Jews?
[‘If they deserve to be rejected,’ Euphranor replies, ‘why
shouldn’t we reject them?’ This introduces an attack on
the ‘accounts and records’ that Alciphron has mentioned.
The only reliable ones don’t go as far back as Moses’ time
for the beginning of the world; the writers of the records
that stretch further back are ‘unknown or unregarded by
ancient astronomers’; modern scholars have uncovered inconsistencies
in the Chinese accounts. Alciphron remarks
that the modern scholars in question are mostly Roman
Catholic missionaries, and Euphranor replies that they are
our only source of information about the Chinese, and that
102
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
in any case it makes sense to trust them: ‘The same persons
who tell us of these accounts refute them! If we reject their
authority in one case, what right have we to build upon it
in another?’ Alciphron praises the Chinese generally, as ‘a
learned, able and acute people’ who are ‘addicted to arts and
sciences’. Euphranor replies at length that on the contrary
the Chinese are superstitious, credulous, and absurd. Then
he turns to the Egyptian records purporting to make the
world older than Moses did, and gets Alciphron to admit
that he doesn’t know where those records were found, when
they were written, how they were preserved, and so on. They
aren’t mentioned by any ancient Greek writers, though some
of them visited Egypt. Euphranor comments again, at even
greater length, on the credulity of any modern person, like
Alciphron, who believes such stuff. Alciphron replies with
a challenge: ‘How can you account for the work that the
great Joseph Scaliger and Sir John Marsham have put in on
those records?’ Euphranor declines to account for it, and
deplores the fact that such substantial scholars as Scaliger
and Marsham should waste time on that rubbishy stuff.]
22. Alciphron: After all, it’s hard to see why those
Egyptian priests should have set up ·spurious ‘records’ supporting·
such great claims to antiquity—records that differ
one from another but are alike in one thing, namely that they
overthrow Moses’ history. How can this be accounted for if
there was no real foundation for the records? What pleasure,
profit or power could motivate men to forge successions of
ancient names and periods of time for ages before the world
began?
Euphranor: Really, Alciphron, is there anything so strange
or unprecedented in this empty wish to extend the antiquity
of nations beyond the truth? Hasn’t it been seen in most
parts of the world? Doesn’t it appear even in our own times,
especially among dependent and subdued people who have
little else to boast of? [He then launches into masses of
detail, first about the Irish and then about the Sicilians,
these being dependent and subdued people who invented
long histories for themselves as a way of feeling important.
Then:] Why isn’t it likely that the Egyptians, a subdued
people, invented fabulous accounts from the same motive,
and like others valued themselves because of extravagant
claims to antiquity, when in all other respects they were so
much inferior to their masters?. . . . And it is no less certain
that the Phœnicians, Assyrians, and Chaldeans were each a
conquered and reduced people before the rest of the world
appear to have heard anything of their claims to such remote
antiquity.
Crito: But what need is there to work at accounting for
the motivations of fabulous writers? Isn’t it sufficient to
see that they •relate absurdities, •aren’t supported by any
independent evidence, •seem not to have been believed even
by their own countrymen, and •are inconsistent one with
another? There’s nothing strange in the fact that men should
have the stupidity to create false accounts so as to deceive
the world; what is strange is the fact that, after so many
learned critics have done so much towards undeceiving the
world, there should still be men who are capable of being
taken in by the paltry scraps of. . . .fabulous or counterfeit
writers.
Alciphron: Let me point out that those learned critics
may prove to be clergymen, perhaps some of them Roman
Catholics.
Crito: What about Sir Isaac Newton: was he either Catholic
or clergyman? You may not grant that he was as wise
and intellectually powerful as the great men of the minute
philosophy; but it you can’t deny that he had read and
103
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
thought a great deal on this subject, ending his inquiry with
a perfect contempt for all those celebrated rivals to Moses.
Alciphron: It has been observed by able men that Sir Isaac
Newton, though a layman, was deeply prejudiced—as we can
from his great regard for the Bible.
Crito: And the same holds for Mr. Locke, Mr. Boyle, Lord Bacon
and other famous laymen who, however knowledgeable
on some matters, can’t be thought to have achieved the keen
discernment that is the special distinction of your sect!
23. But perhaps there are reasons other than prejudice to
incline a man to give Moses the preference. •The government,
manners and religion of his country were based on the
truth of his history. •There are clear traces of that history
in the most ancient books and traditions of the gentiles,
particularly of the Brahmins and Parsees. •His account of
the great flood is confirmed by signs in nature as well as by
·writings of· antiquity. •His history is confirmed by
•the relatively recent invention of arts and sciences,
•the gradual peopling of the world,
•the very names of ancient nations, and even by
•the authority and arguments of that renowned philosopher
Lucretius
—who is so much admired and followed by the free-thinkers
when he writes on other subjects. •The continual decrease
of fluids, the sinking of hills, and the slowing of planetary
motion provide natural evidence that this world had a beginning,
just as the civil or historical proofs that I have
mentioned plainly indicate that this beginning occurred at
about the time assigned to it in the Bible. And after all that,
let me add one more remark. People digging into the earth
have found quantities of shells and (in some places) bones
and horns of animals, complete and unbroken, that have
probably lain there for thousands of years. That makes it
seem probable that gems, medals, and metal or stone implements
might have remained buried, complete and unbroken,
for forty or fifty thousand years, if the world had been that
old. So how does it come about that no ·such· remains
are found; no remnants of all those centuries preceding
the Biblical account of time; no fragments of buildings, no
public monuments, no intaglios, cameos, statues, reliefs,
medals, inscriptions, utensils, or manufactured things of any
kind are ever discovered, to testify to the existence of those
mighty empires, those successions of monarchs, heroes and
demi-gods, for so many thousand years? Let us look forward
in time, and think about
a time twenty thousand years into the future, with
the intervening time having involved plagues, famines,
wars and earthquakes, all of which will have made
great havoc in the world.
Isn’t it highly probable that pillars, vases, and statues
that now exist would still exist at that future time, and
testify to our time and all the time between now and then.
(I’m thinking of pillars etc. made of granite, porphyry or
jasper—stones that are so hard that we know them to have
lasted for two thousand years above ground, without any
considerable alteration.) Isn’t it also probable that some of
our current coins might be dug up at that time far in the
future, or that old walls and the foundations of buildings
might show themselves, just as the shells and stones of the
primeval world are preserved down to our times?
These are matters that anyone can form a judgment
about, using common sense and ·ordinary· experience. They
give us good reason to conclude that the world was created
at about the time recorded in the Bible. . . .
24. Alciphron sat musing and made no answer.
Whereupon Lysicles spoke up, ·harking back to Crito’s
remark that Lucretius supported the Mosaic dating of the
104
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
start of the world·: ‘I must admit that I would rather suppose
with Lucretius that the world was made by chance and that
men grew out of the earth like pumpkins than pin my faith on
those wretched fable-spinning fragments of Oriental history
·that Alciphron had used as evidence against Moses’ dating
of the start of that world·. As for the learned men who have
taken pains to clarify them and piece them together, they
strike me as being no better than so many musty pedants.
An able free-thinker may now and then make some use of
their laborious output, and play off one absurdity against
another—·e.g. an Egyptian absurdity against a Jewish one·.
But don’t infer from this that he has any real respect for
the authority of such apocryphal writers, or believes one
syllable of the Chinese, Babylonian or Egyptian traditions. If
we seem to give them preference over the Bible, that’s only
because they are not established by law! This is my plain
sense of the matter, and I dare say it’s the general sense of
our sect: they are too rational to take such trifles seriously,
though they sometimes give hints of deep learning and put
on a grave face, just to have fun at the expense of bigots.
Alciphron: Since Lysicles will have it so, I am content not to
build on accounts of time preceding the Mosaic. [He then
talks about historians of about Moses’ own time: they should
be regarded as on a par with Moses, he says, and some of
them give accounts that utterly clash with his—e.g. one that
says that the ‘Jews’ were really Egyptians who had leprosy
and were driven out of the country for that reason. On
this account, the religion that they said had been given to
them on Mount Sinai was really something which they, as
Egyptians, brought with them from Egypt.]
[Crito replies that those other accounts aren’t evidence
against the Mosaic one because they are in such conflict
with one another. And that linguistic considerations show
that the Jews weren’t Egyptians. And that a religion whose
‘fundamental principle’ was monotheism, and whose ‘principal
design’ was to abolish idolatry, couldn’t have come
from ‘Egypt, the most idolatrous of all nations’. After some
more of this, Alciphron deplores the loss of the books ‘of
those great men Celsus, Porphyry and Julian’, books that
would have enabled the modern free-thinkers to demolish
the whole ·Jewish religious· system at once’. Crito questions
that, and says some slighting things about each of the three,
especially emphasizing how credulous they were, accepting
all sorts of weird beliefs. They were, he concludes, ‘whimsical,
superstitious, weak and visionary’—and he throws in a
final gibe against the ‘impartial gentlemen’ who ‘admire the
talents, and are proud to tread in the footsteps’ of those
three.]
Alciphron: Men see things in different lights: something that
one person wonders at is regarded as negligible by another;
it can even happen that a prejudiced mind whose attention
is turned towards things’ faults and blemishes fancies it sees
some shadow of defect in the great lights that have in our
own days enlightened the world.
26. But tell me, Crito, what you think of ·the Jewish
historian· Josephus. He is agreed to have been a man of
learning and judgment. He did himself accept a revealed
religion, ·namely Judaism·. And Christians commonly cite
him with respect when his authority suits their purposes.
Crito: All this I accept.
Alciphron: Then mustn’t it seem suspicious, to any impartial
inquirer, that this learned Jew should write the history of
his own country, focusing on the very place and time of
Jesus Christ’s appearance, without saying anything about
the character, miracles and doctrine of that extraordinary
person? Some ancient Christians were so sensitive about
105
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
this that they tried to repair the situation by inserting a
famous passage in ·the work of· that historian—a forgery
that has been sufficiently detected by able modern critics.
Crito: Well, there is expert opinion on both sides of that
question, but I don’t want to get into all that, so I am
content to take it your way by supposing that the passage is
not genuine, but is the pious fraud of some wrong-headed
Christian who couldn’t tolerate the omission in Josephus.
But that fraud can’t make the omission a real objection
against Christianity. And I can’t see in the omission any
other basis for amazement or suspicion. Supposing the
Gospel account to have exactly true, it would seem very
natural for Josephus not to have reported it, given that
•he was aiming by his work to give his country some
standing in the eyes of the world, which had been
greatly prejudiced against the Jews and knew little of
their history—a purpose that the life and death of our
Saviour wouldn’t have contributed to even slightly;
•Josephus couldn’t have been an eye-witness of our
Saviour or his miracles;
•he was a high-class Pharisee who was learned in
foreign as well as Jewish scholarship, with a high position
in the State, whereas the Gospel was preached
to the poor;
•the Gospel was initially accepted and then spread by
poor illiterate people, ·chosen for this role· so that the
Gospels’ spread wouldn’t seem to be the work of man,
or a product of human self-interest or power;
•the Jews generally expected the Messiah to be a
worldly and conquering prince—a prejudice that was
so strong that they preferred attributing our Saviour’s
miracles to the devil to acknowledging him to be the
Messiah;
•at Josephus’s time the Jewish state was in a condition
of hellish disorder and confusion, with men’s minds
filled and stunned by unparalleled wars, dissensions,
massacres, and seditions of that devoted people.
Taking all these facts together, I don’t find it strange that
such a man who was writing with that view, at that time, and
in those circumstances, should omit to describe our blessed
Saviour’s life and death, or to mention his miracles, or to
pay any attention to the state of the Christian church, which
at that time was like a tiny seed just beginning to take root
and germinate. And this will seem even less strange if you
bear in mind that
•the apostles in a few years after our Saviour’s death
left Jerusalem, set about convert non-Jews, and were
dispersed throughout the world;
•the converts in Jerusalem were not only some of the
poorest people but were also few in number (the three
thousand converts added to the church in one day
when Peter preached in Jerusalem seem to have been
strangers from all over the country, who had gathered
there to celebrate the feast of Pentecost);
•throughout the time of Josephus and for several years
more, during a succession of fifteen bishops, the
Christians at Jerusalem conformed to the laws of
Moses, which made them in outward appearance just
like the rest of the Jews, which must have made them
harder to notice.
The Gospel when first propagated seemed to ignore the great
or considerable men of this world; would it be surprising if
they in turn overlooked it, as something not suited to their
way of thinking?
[He goes on to say that learned Jews at that time might
well be afraid in one way of writing in favour of Christianity
and in another way of writing against it, so that their safest
course was to say nothing about it. Also, the historian
106
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
Gamaliel does mention Jesus Christ in passing, in his
account of St. James’s death. Although he shows a respect
for the apostle, he mentions Jesus in a casual and neutral
way, saying nothing either good or bad about him; but he
characterizes him as:
Jesus ‘who was called the Christ’, not ‘who claimed
to be the Christ’ or ‘who was falsely called the Christ’,
but simply. . . ’ and then he says it again, this time in
Greek.
He continues:] It is evident that Josephus knew there was
such a man as Jesus, and that he was said to be the Christ,
and yet he condemns neither him nor his followers; which
I see as evidence in their favour. If Josephus had known
or been convinced that Jesus was an impostor, of course he
would have said so plainly. . . .
I can’t understand why any man should conclude against
the truth of the Gospel from Josephus’s omitting to •speak
of it, any more than from his omitting to •accept it. If the
first Christians been chief priests and rulers, or men of
science and learning,. . . .it might have been more plausible
to contend that their religion was a human construct than it
is in fact, given that it has pleased God to use weak things
to confound the strong. . . .
27. Alciphron: Yet it seems an odd argument in support
of any doctrine that it was preached by simple people to
simple people.
Crito: It would indeed be a very weak argument if the only
testimony to the doctrine came from simple people. But what
we have here is a doctrine of which this is true:
•its first instruments were people with very few human
advantages,
•it made its first progress among people who didn’t
have wealth, skills or power to grace or encourage it,
•in a short time, through its own innate excellence and
the mighty force of miracles and the demonstration of
the ·Holy· Spirit, it spread throughout the world and
subdued men of all ranks and conditions of life, doing
this not only with no support from all worldly motives
but positively against such motives.
Isn’t it very unreasonable to reject or suspect such a doctrine
on the grounds that its human means are lowly? Mightn’t
this with much better reason be thought to be evidence that
the doctrine comes from God?
[Alciphron replies that real inquirers will demand testimony
from learned men. Crito: There has been plenty of
that. Alciphron: But their testimony is suspect because they
were ‘prejudiced Christians’, and therefore their testimony
is to be suspected. Crito: You are demanding evidence of
the truth of Christianity from people who didn’t believe it;
this isn’t reasonable. They kick this topic around for a while,
and then a dispute starts up concerning how much respect
the early Church Fathers deserve. Alciphron says that even
if he did give weight to early Christian writings, ‘the great
number of forgeries and heresies that sprung up in those
times’ would considerably take away from that weight.]
Crito: Let us suppose something that you do agree to be
possible, namely that there is a God, a devil, and a revelation
from heaven that was committed to writing many
centuries ago. On the basis of that supposition, take a look
at human nature, and ask what would probably follow if the
supposition were fact. Isn’t it very likely there would be
half-believers, mistaken bigots, holy frauds, men who
were ambitious, self-interested, disputing, conceited,
schismatic, heretical, absurd
among those who announced themselves as believers in this
revealed religion? And isn’t it also very likely that after a few
107
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
centuries there would be
various readings, omissions, transpositions, and obscurities
in the text of the sacred oracles? You be the judge: is it
reasonable to treat as an objection to something a course of
events that would probably and naturally follow if the thing
in question did exist?
Alciphron: Well, say what you will, this variety of opinions
must shake the faith of a reasonable man. Where there
are so many different opinions on the same point, it’s very
certain that they can’t all be true, but it’s certain that they
can all be false. And the means we have to use to find out
the truth! When a man of sense embarks on this inquiry, he
finds himself suddenly startled and thrown off-balance by
hard words and knotty questions. This makes him abandon
the pursuit, thinking the game not worth the chase.
[Crito replies that differences of opinion and the formation
of sects occurs in all branches of human study—he
cites law, medicine, and politics—and this doesn’t deter
us from thinking that there are ‘good rules, sound ideas,
and useful truths in all those disciplines’. He develops this
approach in connection with medicine, remarking that real
discoveries have been made, despite the ‘hard words and
knotty questions’ that have arisen on the way to them. Then,
after a brief exchange of insults, Crito turns to the question
of schisms and sub-sects:] But to return: what profession
of men is there who never split into schisms, and never
talk nonsense? Isn’t it obvious that out of all the kinds of
knowledge on which the human mind is employed there grow
certain excrescences that can safely be pared off, as we pare
our finger-nails. Under all that rubbishy stuff, it is certain
that the faith derived from Christ and his apostles was not a
piece of empty sophistry. . . . And to claim to demolish •the
foundation of faith for the sake of •the superstructure that
humans have built. . . .is a sign of poor thinking; and it’s a
sign of unfairness to suppose that a doubtful sense is fixed,
and argue from one side of the question in disputed points.
Such questions as
•Should the beginning of Genesis be understood in a
literal or an allegorical sense?
•Is the book of Job a history or a parable?
are disputed amongst Christians; so an unbeliever has no
right to argue from one side of any of them. What we are
arguing for now is not •this or that tenet of a sect, •this or
that controversial idea, but rather •the general faith taught
by Christ and his apostles and preserved by universal and
perpetual tradition in all the churches down to our own
times. To attack this divine doctrine on account of things
that come not from within the doctrine but from external
sources such as the theories and disputes of men strikes
me as an absurdity comparable with cutting down a fine
tree that provides fruit and shade because its leaves give
nourishment to caterpillars or because spiders sometimes
weave cobwebs among the branches.
[After an exchange focussing on the question of how clever
men ought to spend their time:]
Alciphron: But after all the examination and inquiry that
mortal man can make about revealed religion, it is impossible
to reach any rational sure footing. We are told strange things
that are said to be proved by the fact that men have laid down
their lives ·for them·. But it is perfectly conceivable—indeed
it has often happened—that men have died for the sake of
·false· beliefs that they used to hold.
Crito: You may indeed find examples of men dying for
falsehoods that they believed; but can you find a case of
a man’s dying for the sake of a proposition that he didn’t
108
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
believe? Of course not; it is inconceivable. Yet this must
be what happened if the witnesses of Christ’s miracles and
resurrection were impostors.
30. Alciphron: There is indeed a great deal of glittery
talk about faith based on miracles. But when I examine
this matter thoroughly, and track the Christian faith back
to its origins, I find that it is really based on darkness and
hesitation and uncertainty. Instead of propositions that
are evident, or ·at least· agreeable to human reason, I find
an astonishing narrative of the Son of God tempted in the
wilderness by the devil—something utterly unexplainable,
having absolutely no purpose or use or reason. I meet
with strange stories of angels appearing, voices from heaven,
demons—things quite out of line with common sense and
common experience—along with a number of incredible feats
said to have been done by divine power but more probably
the inventions of men, and not made less likely to be so
by my complete inability to guess why they were invented.
Deeply laid plans are dark, and the less we •know the more
we •suspect; but even if all those stories are true, I shan’t
accept that they were miraculous until I have a thorough
knowledge of ordinary natural causes and of the force of
magic.
Crito: It seems to me, Alciphron, that what you are analysing
is not faith but infidelity [= ‘lack of faith’], and that you are
tracing it back to its sources which, judging from your own
account, I understand to be
dark and doubtful worries and surmises,
hastiness in judging, and
narrowness in thinking.
And all this is based on your fantastic over-rating of your
own scrap of experience, and on real ignorance of the views
of God and of the qualities, operations, and inter-relations of
the many ·fundamentally different· kinds of beings that exist
in the universe (or that you don’t know don’t exist). That’s
what the sources of unbelief are like—obscure, uncertain,
fanciful and conjectural. Whereas the sources of faith are
propositions that seem to me plain and clear. There is
nothing unclear about these:
•This faith in Christ was spread throughout the world
soon after his death.
•That wasn’t brought about by human learning, politics
or power.
•In the church’s early years many knowledgeable and
honest men accepted this faith not from some but
against all worldly motives.
•The nearer those men were to the fountain-head of
Christianity, the better chance they had to check on
the truth of the propositions that they believed.
•The less it was in their self-interest to be persuaded,
the more need there was for evidence to convince
them.
•They relied on the authority of people who declared
themselves eye-witnesses of the miracles and resurrection
of Christ.
•Those professed eye-witnesses suffered greatly
through giving this testimony, and finally they sealed
it with their blood.
•Those witnesses, weak and unimportant as they were,
overcame the world—spread more light, preached
purer morals, and did more benefit to mankind than
all the philosophers and wise men put together.
If these propositions are clear and sure (as they seem to me
to be), they constitute plain, just and reasonable grounds
for assent ·to the Christian faith·. They don’t rest on any
falsehoods; they don’t contain anything beyond our sphere,
because they don’t presuppose more knowledge than we have
109
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
or better faculties than we are actually equipped with; and
even if they aren’t accepted as morally certain (as I think they
will be by fair and unprejudiced inquirers), even accepting
them as only probable is sufficient to stop the mouth of an
unbeliever. [‘Morally certain’ means ‘certain enough for all practical
purposes’; it’s a bit vague, but is stronger than ‘only probable’.] The
pillars of our faith are the above ·eight· plain propositions,
and not the obscure ones that you supposed, which are in
fact the unsound, uncertain sources of unbelief in a rash,
prejudiced, and assuming mind. To argue or counter-argue
on the basis that a supposed miracle might be explained
by hidden powers of nature or by magic is groping in the
dark; but by the evident light of their senses men can be
sure enough about perceptible effects and matters of fact,
such as the miracles and the resurrection of Christ; and the
testimony of such men can be passed on through centuries
with the same moral certainty as can other historical narrations;
and those same miraculous facts, when reason has
related them to the doctrines they were brought to prove,
provide an unbiased mind with strong indications that they
have come from God or from a superior source. . . .
As for the fact that Jews and gentiles back then attributed
our Saviour’s miracles to magic—do you count that as
evidence against the miracles? It seems to be to be positive
evidence that those events did occur; it doesn’t square with
the Christian account of what caused them, but it doesn’t
bring any evidence against that account. As for the nature
and operations of demons, the history, laws and system
of rational beings, and God’s schemes or views—we don’t
claim to know enough about all this to account for every
action and appearance recorded in the Gospel; but you
don’t know enough of those things to be entitled to object
against accounts that are so well supported by testimony.
It’s easy to raise doubts regarding many authentic parts
of civil history—events that we find inexplicable because
the explanation of them requires more knowledge than
we have of facts, circumstances, and councils. And it’s
even easier with respect to natural history. In that field, if
•surmises were accepted as evidence against things that are
odd, strange and inexplicable; if •our slight experience were
made the rule and measure of truth, and no phenomenon
was accepted unless we (with our ignorance of the principles,
laws and system of nature) could explain it; •we would make
discoveries all right—discoveries about our own blindness
and presumption! Something that I can’t begin to explain
by any rules of logic and good sense is why men who are so
easily and so often floored by problems about the natural
visible world should yet be so sharp-sighted and dogmatic
about the invisible world and its mysteries. . . .
Alciphron: I expect that I’ll always be ‘in the dark’—·as you
put it·—about the evidence for the Christian religion, and
always presume there isn’t any.
31. For how is it possible, at this remote distance ·in
time·, to arrive at any knowledge or conduct any demonstrations
about it?
Crito: What of it? I admit that •knowledge in a strict sense
can’t be had except of something that is either self-evident
or •demonstrated; but •probable arguments are a sufficient
basis for •faith. Who ever thought that rigorous proofs are
necessary to make a Christian? All that is needed is faith;
and provided that men are convinced in the main and on
the whole, this saving faith can be consistent with some
degrees of obscurity, doubt, and error. For although the light
of truth is unchangeable in its eternal source, the Father
of Lights, in relation to us it is variously weakened and
obscured by passing across a long distance or through a
thick medium in which it is intercepted, distorted or tinted
110
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
by men’s prejudices and passions. But despite all this, if
you will use your eyes you can see enough for the purposes
either of nature or of grace, although the light you see by is
dimmer or brighter depending on the place, the distance, the
time of day, and the medium. And although there may be
much that we can’t explain in the realms of nature and of
grace, all that is required ·for faith to be maintained· is that
the two should exhibit enough analogy to make it probable
that they have the same author, are the workmanship of one
and the same hand.
Alciphron: Those who saw, touched and handled Jesus
Christ after his resurrection (if anyone did) may be said
to have seen by a clear light; but to us the light is very dim,
and yet we are expected to believe in the resurrection just
as they did. For my part, I agree with Spinoza that Christ’s
death was literal, but his resurrection was allegorical.
Crito: And, for my part, I can’t see anything in this celebrated
unbeliever that should make me desert matters of fact, and
moral evidence, so as to adopt his ideas. [Throughout this
paragraph ‘evidence’ means ‘evidentness’. In this usage, ‘the evidence
of proposition P’ refers to how evident P is; it’s not about evidence for
P. So ‘matters of fact and moral evidence’ means ‘matters of fact and
propositions that are morally evident’. Re ‘morally’, see the note on
page 110.] I do have to allow a certain allegorical resurrection—
I mean the ‘resurrection’ of Christ’s disciples from weakness
to resolution, from fear to courage, from despair to hope;
and that allegorical resurrection is evidence for the real one,
because I can’t see how those changes in the disciples can
be explained except by supposing that they knew through
their own senses that our Lord had truly, really, literally
risen from the dead. It can’t be denied that his disciples,
who were eye-witnesses of his miracles and resurrection,
had stronger evidence than we can have of those matters;
but it also can’t be denied that at that time there was a
correspondingly greater need for evidence, to induce men to
embrace a new institution that was contrary to the whole
system of their upbringing, their prejudices, their passions,
their interests, and every human motive. Still, it seems to
me that the moral evidence and probable arguments that
are within our reach are quite enough to make prudent
thinking men keep to the faith that has been handed down
to us from our ancestors and established by the laws of
our country—a faith •requiring submission on matters that
are above our knowledge, and for the rest •recommending
doctrines that best fit our interests and our reason. [He goes
on to talk about the advantage that we have of being able to
look back at the history of the world during the Christian
period, and seeing God’s plans a work in it. Then:] We can
behold Christ crucified, that stumbling-block to the Jews
and foolishness to the Greeks, putting an end to the temple
worship of the one and the idolatry of the other. . . . [‘But we
preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the
Greeks foolishness.’ (1 Corinthians 1:23).]
32. If a due reflection on these things isn’t enough to
create a reverence for the Christian faith in the minds of
men, ·why would that be·? Because men have a wise and
cautious incredulity? Anything but that! Consider how
easily men have faith during their daily doings, where there
is no prejudice or appetite to bias or disturb their natural
judgment. The men who in matters of religion won’t move an
inch unless things are made evident to them, and at every
turn expect demonstration, trust their health to a physician
and their lives to a sailor, with complete faith. I can’t think
they deserve the honour of being thought harder to convince
than other men, or that they are more accustomed to know
and therefore less inclined to believe. On the contrary, it’s
tempting to suspect that our modern unbelief owes more to
111
Alciphron George Berkeley Sixth dialogue
ignorance than to knowledge. . . .
[This leads to squabbles with Lysicles about attitudes
to careful scholarship, and then about the legitimacy of
attacking Christianity by jokes and puns and innuendo.
Euphranor joins in on that last topic, and so finally does
Alciphron:]
Alciphron: Although I am a declared admirer of reason, a
worshipper of reason, I have to admit that in some cases
the sharpness of ridicule can do more than the strength of
argument. But if ·free-thinkers· sometimes use mirth and
humour, it’s not because we have no other weapons. It shall
never be said that a free-thinker was afraid of reasoning.
No, Crito, we have reasons in store, the best are yet to
come; and if we can find an hour for another conversation
before Lysicles and I set out for London tomorrow morning,
I’ll undertake to supply you with reasons that are as clear,
effective, and close to the point as you could wish.
112
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Seventh dialogue (Tuesday)
1. We assembled at break of day in the library.
Alciphron began with a declaration of his sincerity, assuring
us he had very maturely and with a most unbiased mind
considered everything that had been said the day before. He
added that a number of probable reasons had been given for
accepting the Christian faith. ‘But’, he said, ‘because those
reasons are only probable, they can’t overcome absolute
certainty and demonstration. So if I can demonstrate [=
‘rigorously] prove’ that your religion is absurd and inconsistent,
your probable arguments in defence of it instantly lose their
force, and with it all right to be answered or considered.
When sincere and able witnesses give the same testimony,
that certainly has great weight in human affairs; it can
even have enough weight to claim our acceptance of things
that are odd and out of line with human judgment and
or experience. I will also concede that it is possible for a
tradition—·i.e. a chain of testimonies·—to be conveyed with
moral evidence [see note on page 110] through many centuries.
But you must concede that something that’s demonstrably
and obviously false shouldn’t be accepted on the strength of
any testimony whatever, because however good testimony is
it can’t amount to demonstration. To be plain, no testimony
can turn nonsense into sense; no moral evidence can make
contradictions consistent. Well, then, because the strength
of our cause doesn’t •depend on critical points of history,
chronology or languages, it can’t be •decided by any such
points. Don’t be surprised if the same kind of tradition that
governs our assent with respect to facts in civil or natural
history is not accepted as sufficient support for metaphysical
absurdities and absolute impossibilities. Things that are
obscure and unaccountable in human affairs or the operations
of nature may nevertheless be possible, and if the
testimony to them is good enough they may be assented
to; but religious assent or faith can be plainly shown to
be intrinsically impracticable, impossible and absurd. This
is the primary reason for unbelief. This is our citadel and
fortress; it may indeed be ornamented with extra turrets
and supplementary walls of learnedness of various sorts,
but if those are demolished the fortress still stands; its own
strength makes it impregnable.
Euphranor: Well I have to admit that this shrinks our field
of inquiry considerably. If you make good on what you have
just said, I’ll have nothing more to say.
Alciphron: It is easy to fool the shallow mind of the vulgar,
because it attends only to the surfaces of things, and thinks
about them ·not in detail· but en bloc. And so we find a blind
reverence for religious faith and mystery. But when a sharp
philosopher comes to dissect and analyse these items of
faith, the deceit plainly appears; and because he isn’t blind
he has no reverence for empty notions—or, more accurately,
for mere forms of speech that mean nothing and are of no
use to mankind.
2. [The long speech that follows involves a theory of meaning and
understanding that was widely accepted at the time; its principal source
is the third Book of Locke’s Essay Concerning Human Understanding.]
Words are signs: they stand for ideas, or they ought to; and
so far as they suggest ideas, they are significant. Words
that don’t suggest any ideas are insignificant. Someone
who associates a clear idea with each word that he uses
speaks sense; and when such ideas are lacking, the speaker
utters nonsense. So if we want to know whether someone’s
speech is senseless and insignificant, all we need do is to set
113
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
aside the words and consider the ideas suggested by them.
Because men can’t immediately communicate their ideas to
one another, they have to use sensible signs or words, the
purpose of which is to raise in the hearer’s mind the ideas
that are already are in the speaker’s; and if they fail to do this
they are useless. . . . For someone to count as understanding
what he reads or hears, he must have a sequence of ideas
raised in his mind corresponding to the sequence of words
that he has read or heard. These are plain truths that men
readily assent to •in theory, but they aren’t much attended
to •in practice, so they deserve to be expounded in detail and
drummed into people, however obvious and undeniable they
may be. People in general don’t much like •thinking, but they
don’t mind •speaking and •listening to the speech of others;
and the effect of that is that their minds are stored with
names rather than ideas, the husk of knowledge rather than
knowledge itself. And yet these words without meaning are
often what mark off one party ·or sect or group of partisans·
from another, forming the subject matter of their disputes
and the object of their zeal! This is the most general cause of
error; and it isn’t restricted to ordinary minds; even people
who are regarded as acute and learned philosophers are
often busy working at •names instead of •things or •ideas,
and are thought to be expressing knowledge when really
they are only uttering hard words without a meaning.
3. Knowledge is the perception of the connection or
disagreement between ideas; and someone who doesn’t
distinctly perceive the ideas associated with the terms can’t
form a mental proposition corresponding to the verbal one;
so obviously that person can’t possibly have knowledge. He
can’t even be said to have opinion or faith; these imply a
weaker assent than knowledge does, but it still has to be
assent to a proposition; and although the agreement or
disagreement of the ideas won’t be as evident as in the case
of knowledge, the terms of the ·verbal· proposition have to
be understood just as clearly ·as they are in knowledge·,
which means that the conventionally associated ideas must
be clearly in the person’s mind. I’ll say it again: all degrees of
assent—whether based on reason or authority, and wherever
they are on the spectrum from ‘I am compelled to believe
this’ at one end to ‘I am faintly more inclined to accept this
than to deny it’ at the other—are internal acts of the mind
that are directed at ideas, without which there really can’t
be any such thing as knowledge, faith, or opinion. We can
perhaps raise a dust by arguing with one another about
purely verbal propositions, but that is mere trifling. All this
will be readily agreed to with respect to human learning
and science [here = ‘abstract, theoretically organised and deductively
interlocked bodies of knowledge’], because in that domain it is a
generally accepted method of exposing any doctrine or thesis
to strip off its words and examine what ideas—if any—are
underneath. This is often found to be the shortest way to end
disputes, which might otherwise grow and multiply without
end, with the disputants not understanding one another or
themselves. I needn’t give examples: this ·doctrine about
meaning and understanding· shines by its own light and is
accepted by all thinking men. What I shall do is to apply the
doctrine to our present topic. I hope I don’t need to argue
that the rules of reason and good sense that hold sway •in
all other subjects ought to be applied •in religion also. (Well,
there are those who consider faith and reason to be two
distinct domains, and want us to think that good sense has
nothing to do with the domain of faith—which is in fact the
region where it has most to do. I have decided never to argue
with such men, but leave them peacefully in possession of
their prejudices.) In applying what I have said ·about ideas
and understanding to issues in religion·, I shan’t single out
any nit-picking disputes in academic theology. Nor shall I
114
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
pick on any doctrines concerning the nature and essence of
God, because you might counter what I said about any of
those by claiming that God is infinite and that the problem I
had raised was part of our general difficulty in grasping the
nature of infinity.
4. The central item in the Christian dispensation is grace.
Nothing is mentioned or considered more often than grace
is, throughout the New Testament, which represents it as
something of a very special kind, distinct from anything
•revealed to the Jews or •known by the light of nature.
This same grace is spoken of as the ‘gift of God’,
as ‘coming through Jesus Christ’, as ‘reigning’, as
‘abounding’, as ‘operating’. Men are said to speak
through grace, and to believe through grace. Mention
is made of the glory of grace, the riches of grace, the
stewards of grace. Christians are said to be heirs of
grace, to receive grace, grow in grace, be strong in
grace, to stand in grace, and to fall from grace. And
lastly, grace is said to justify and to save them.
Hence Christianity is styled the •covenant or •dispensation of
grace [meaning that Christianity rests on •promises that God has made
through grace, and •favours that he has given through grace]. And it’s
well known that no point has created more controversy in
the church than this doctrine of grace. There have been
many disputes about
•the nature, extent and effects of grace, and about
•the kinds of grace—universal, efficacious, sufficient,
preventing and irresistible—
that have employed the pens of Protestant as well as Roman
Catholic theologians [and he reels off the names of several
Christian sects]. I’m not even slightly interested in just what
these disputes have been, so I shan’t try to list them now.
All I need ·to make my point· is that great contests on these
points have existed and still continue. What I would like to
be told is the answer to this: What is the clear and distinct
idea associated with the word ‘grace’? Presumably one can
know the bare meaning of a term without going into the
depth of all those learned inquiries ·and controversies·. This
is surely an easy matter, provided there is an idea connected
to the term. And if there isn’t, it can’t be •a subject of a
rational dispute or •an object of real faith. Of course men
may indeed deceive themselves or others by claiming to argue
and believe, when basically there is no argument or belief
that goes beyond mere verbal trifling. I can easily understand
‘grace’ in one of its everyday non-religious senses:
•‘grace’ meaning ‘beauty’ (·‘a blushing womanly grace’·),
and
•‘grace’ meaning ‘favour’ (·‘the signs of grace that the
Queen showed to Raleigh’·).
But when ‘grace’ names an active, vital, ruling principle
[roughly = ‘source of energy or activity’; see (b) in Euphranor’s speech on
pages 36–37], influencing and operating on the mind of man
and distinct from every natural power or motive, I declare
that I can’t understand it, or form any distinct idea of it;
and therefore I can’t assent to any proposition about it, and
so I can’t have any faith regarding it; and it’s a self-evident
truth that God doesn’t require anyone to do what he can’t
do. [When Alciphron talks of a word as signifying a distinct idea, he may
mean •that the idea is intrinsically clear, or •that the idea is distinct from
all ideas associated with other words, or •both. In this version, ‘distinct’
will be allowed to stand, unexplained.]
A philosophical friend of mine asked me to look at the
writings of some theologians that he showed me, which I did;
and I also talked with others on this subject; but after all
my reading and conversations I could make nothing of it;
whenever I set aside the word ‘grace’ and looked into my own
mind, I found a complete absence of ideas. And (because
I suspect that men’s minds and abilities are much alike)
115
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
I suspect that other men, if they examined what they call
‘grace’ with the same exactness and lack of bias, would agree
with me that there was nothing to it but an empty name. This
isn’t the only example of a ·meaningless· word that is often
heard and spoken but is believed to be intelligible simply
because it is familiar; there are many others that occur
in sentences that are said to express necessary articles of
faith. The fraud that ‘grace’ imposes on mankind is, I think,
partly the following. Men speak of this holy principle as
of something that acts, moves and makes things happen,
taking their ideas from physical things—from motion and the
force or momentum of bodies. Because bodies are obvious
and perceptible, men put them in place of grace, a spiritual
and incomprehensible thing that is clearly a delusion. Even
if our idea of bodily force is ever so clear and intelligible, it
doesn’t follow that the idea of grace, ·a supposed force, but
one· that has nothing bodily about it, must be clear and
intelligible too. And though we can reason clearly, perceive,
assent, and form opinions about bodily force, it doesn’t at
all follow that we can do the same regarding grace. And so it
comes about that a clear sense-based idea of something real
produces—or rather is made a pretence for—an imaginary
spiritual faith that isn’t actually about anything! ·I call the
faith ‘imaginary’ because· it isn’t possible for it to be real.
Where there are no ideas there can’t be any assent, and
where there is no assent there can’t be any faith. And if
something is impossible, no man can be obliged to have it or
do it—that’s as clear as anything in Euclid!
5. Euphranor: Whatever it is that words are used for, I
can’t believe that they are used to do impossible things. So
let us look into what they are used for, and see if we can
make sense of our daily practice. Words, it is agreed, are
signs; so it might be as well to examine the use of other
signs, so as to understand the use of words. Counters at a
card-table are used not for their own sake but only as signs
substituted for money, as words are substituted for ideas.
Tell me, Alciphron, is it necessary every time these counters
are used throughout the game to form an idea of the precise
amount of money that each represents?
Alciphron: By no means; all that’s needed is that the players
agree on their respective values at the outset, and cash them
in at those values when the game is over.
Euphranor: And in adding up some numbers, where the
figures stand for pounds, shillings and pence, do you think
it’s necessary to form ideas of pounds, shillings and pence
at each step in the operation?
Alciphron: I don’t; all that is required is for the figures on the
bottom line to direct our actions ·appropriately· with respect
to things.
Euphranor: It seems to follow from this that words can be
significant even if they don’t, every time they are used, arouse
in our minds the ideas that they signify; because it’s enough
·for meaningfulness· if we have it in our power to substitute
things or ideas for the words when there is a call for it.
It seems to follow also that words have a use additional
to that of •marking and suggesting distinct ideas, namely
•influencing our behaviour; and there are two ways for them
to do that—•forming rules for us to act by, and •arousing
certain passions, dispositions and emotions in our minds.
So it seems that a discourse that tells us how to act, or
spurs the doing or not-doing of an action, can be useful and
significant even if the words making it up don’t each bring a
distinct idea into our minds.
Alciphron: It seems so.
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, isn’t an idea altogether
inactive?
Alciphron: It is.
116
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Euphranor: So an agent—·something that does things·, an
active mind or spirit—can’t be an idea and can’t be like an
idea. From which it would seem to follow that the words
that stand for an active principle, soul or spirit don’t stand
for ideas in the strict and proper sense of ‘ideas’. But they
aren’t insignificant ·or meaningless, as I can show through
one really striking example, namely· the word ‘I’ (or the word
‘myself’) as used by me. I understand what it signifies; I
know what it means; but what it signifies isn’t an idea and
isn’t like an idea—rather, it is something that thinks and
wills and grasps ideas and does things with them. It can’t
be denied that we know what is meant by the terms ‘myself’,
‘will’, ‘memory’, ‘love’, ‘hate’, and so forth—we have some
notion that we understand ·relating to them·—even though
strictly speaking these words don’t suggest distinct ideas
to us. [In this version of the seventh dialogue, the uses of ‘idea’ and
‘notion’ will exactly track Berkeley’s.]
Alciphron: What would you infer from this?
Euphranor: What I have inferred already, namely that words
can be significant without standing for ideas. It’s because
people thought otherwise that the doctrine of abstract ideas
has arisen.
Alciphron: Do you deny that the mind can abstract?
Euphranor: I don’t deny that it can ‘abstract’ in a certain
sense ·of that word·: we can think about one thing separately
from another if (but only if) they could exist separately
and could be perceived separately. So we can ‘abstract’
by thinking about a man’s head and not about his body, or
think about colour without thinking about motion, or think
about shape without thinking about weight. But it doesn’t
follow from this that the mind can frame abstract general
ideas—·e.g. thinking about colour without thinking about
any specific hue·—which appear to be impossible.
Alciphron: Yet it is generally thought these days that every
noun [replacing ‘substantive name’, here and throughout] marks out
and exhibits to the mind one distinct idea separate from all
others.
Euphranor: Tell me, Alciphron, isn’t the word ‘number’ a
noun?
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: Well, now, see if you can form an idea of number
in abstract—not bringing •verbal signs or •things that are
numbered. Speaking for myself: I can’t!.
Alciphron: Can it be so difficult to form a simple idea
of number, which is the subject-matter of a most evident
demonstrable science? Wait a bit, let me see if I can’t abstract
the idea of number from number-words and numerals and
from all particular countable things. (Long pause.) To tell
the truth, I don’t find that I can.
Euphranor: Apparently, then, neither you nor I can form
distinct simple ideas of number, and yet we can make a very
proper and significant use of number-words and numerals.
They direct us in the management of our affairs, and do it in
such an essential way that we would be lost without them.
And yet, if other men’s abilities are like mine, achieving a
precise simple abstract idea of number is as difficult as is
comprehending any mystery in religion.
6. To come now to your example: let us examine what
idea we can form of force, abstracted from body, motion, and
outward perceptible effects. Speaking (again) for myself: I
don’t find that I have or can have any such idea.
Alciphron: Surely everyone knows what is meant by ‘force’.
Euphranor: And yet I question whether everyone can form a
distinct idea of force. I beg you, Alciphron, don’t be distracted
by words; set aside the word ‘force’, and exclude everything
117
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
else from your thoughts, and then see what precise idea you
have of force.
Alciphron: Force is that in bodies which produces motion
and other perceptible effects.
Euphranor: It is then something distinct from those effects?
Alciphron: It is.
Euphranor: Well, then, please now set aside any thought of
•the thing that has the force and •the effects that follow from
it, and contemplate force itself through its own precise idea.
Alciphron: I have to say that I find it difficult!
Euphranor: Shut your eyes to assist your meditation. (Alciphron
closed his eyes and thought for a few minutes, and
then declared that he couldn’t do it.)
‘Well then,’ replied Euphranor, ‘there is something that
it seems neither you nor I can form an idea of; and your
own remark that men’s minds and abilities are much alike
implies that no-one else has any more of an idea of it than
we do.’
Alciphron: It does.
Euphranor: And yet there are certainly many speculations,
reasonings, and disputes, refined subtleties, and intricate
distinctions relating to this same force. And to explain its
nature and mark out the different notions of it or kinds of it,
learned men have used the terms ‘gravity’, ‘reaction’, ‘inertial
force’, ‘inherent force’, ‘immediate force’, ‘dead force’, ‘live
force’, ‘momentum’, solicitatio, conatus and various other
such expressions; and big controversies have arisen about
the notions or definitions of these terms. Men had wanted to
know whether force is spiritual or bodily, whether it remains
after action, how it is transferred from one body to another.
Strange paradoxes have been concocted about its nature,
properties and proportions: for instance, that opposite forces
can exist at the same time in the same quiescent body; that
the force of percussion in a small particle is infinite. [He
names a book in which details can be found, and goes on
at some length about controversies between Leibniz and
others over forces in physics. Then:] The ingenious Toricelli
says. . . .concerning the •momentum and the •velocity of
heavy falling bodies that they are ‘a certain something’ and
‘an I-don’t-know-what’. What does all this tell us about the
idea of force—just force itself, setting aside body, time, space,
motion, and all the perceptible measures of force? Can’t we
say that it’s as difficult to form an idea of force as to form an
idea of grace?
Alciphron: I don’t know what to think about that.
7. Euphranor: But I presume you’ll agree that some
propositions or theorems relating to force are obviously •true
and also •useful. For instance,
what Berkeley wrote: that a body with conjunct forces describes
the diagonal of a parallelogram in the same time that
it would the sides with separate.
what he ought to have meant: if a body is subject to two
forces, represent them by two lines drawn from a single
point—direction representing direction, and length representing
strength. Add two more lines to complete a parallelogram.
The resultant force on the body is represented by the
diagonal of the parallelogram.
Isn’t this theorem very widely useful? Doesn’t the doctrine of
the composition and resolution of forces depend on it, and
through that countless rules and theorems telling us how to
act, and explaining phenomena all through mechanics and
mathematical physics? And if this theorem
•helps men to get the knowledge of many inventions in
mechanics, and
•teaches them how to make engines that they can use
118
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
to do things that are otherwise hard or impossible,
and
•provides a key to discovering the nature of planetary
motions (in addition to all its usefulness here on
earth),
are we going to say that it is not practically or theoretically
useful because we have no distinct idea of force? ·Obviously
not!· Well, given that we take that line with force, what excuse
have we for going a different way with grace? If there are
queries, disputes, perplexities, and diverging notions and
opinions about grace, so there are about force also; if we
can’t form any precise distinct idea of grace, neither can
we of force. Oughtn’t we by parity of reasoning to conclude
that there may be various true and useful propositions about
grace, just as there are about force? And oughtn’t you also to
conclude that grace may, for all you know to the contrary, be
an object of our faith, and influence our life and actions by
attacking evil habits and supporting good ones, even though
we can’t get a distinct idea of grace all on its own, separated
or abstracted from •God who produces it, •man who receives
it, and •virtue and piety that result from it?
8. Shan’t we allow the same method of arguing, the
same rules of logic, reason and good sense, to hold sway
in spiritual matters as in physical ones, in faith as well as
in physics? And when we are examining God’s revelations,
shan’t we use the same candour, and make the same allowances,
as we do when examining the discoveries of men?
I can’t see how a philosopher can be free from bias and
prejudice, or be said to weigh things in an equal balance, if
he maintains the doctrine of •force and rejects that of •grace,
or admits the abstract idea of •triangle while ridiculing •the
Holy Trinity. Anyway, however partial or prejudiced other
minute philosophers may be, you have laid it down as a
maxim that the same logic which governs in other matters
must be admitted in religion.
Lysicles: Alciphron, I think you’d do better to stay with the
method of wit and humour, rather than trying religion by the
dry test of reason and logic!
Alciphron: Don’t worry; by all the rules of right reason, it
is absolutely impossible that any mystery—especially the
Trinity—should really be the object of man’s faith.
Euphranor: I’m not surprised that you thought so while
you held that no-one could assent to a ·verbal· proposition
without forming in his mind distinct ideas associated with
the words in it. But. . . .you have agreed that those signs can
be significant even if they don’t suggest ideas represented by
them, provided they serve to regulate and influence our wills,
passions or behaviour; which commits you to agreeing also
that •a man’s mind can assent to propositions containing
such terms when •it is directed or affected by them, even if
•it doesn’t perceive ·in itself· distinct ideas marked by those
terms. It seems to follow from this that a man can believe
the doctrine of the Trinity if he finds it revealed in the Bible
that
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost
are God, and that there is only one God. He can believe this
doctrine of
a Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier
—·•three •persons making one •substance·—even though he
doesn’t form in his mind any abstract or distinct ideas of
•Trinity, •person, or •substance, provided that the doctrine
has the right effect on his mind, producing in it love, hope,
gratitude and obedience, thereby becoming a lively operative
principle that influences his life and actions in ways that fit
with the notion of saving faith that is required in a Christian.
Whether this is right or wrong, it seems to follow from what
you have declared together with what you have conceded.
119
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
I wonder if there is anything parallel to this Christian
faith in the minute philosophy. Suppose a fine gentleman or
lady of fashion, who are too busy to think for themselves and
are only free-thinkers at second-hand, have the advantage
of being initiated quite early into the principles of your sect
by listening to men of depth and genius who have often
expressed the opinion that the world is governed either by
fate or by chance, and it doesn’t matter which. [See Q&A note
on page 17.] (i) You won’t deny that it is possible for such
persons to give their assent to either of these propositions,
·the ‘fate’ one and the ‘chance’ one·. (ii) And their assent
can properly be called faith. (iii) And yet these disciples of
the minute philosophy may be unable to dive deep enough
to form any abstract or precise or definite idea of fate or of
chance. (iv) So that this same gentleman or lady may be
said to believe or have faith where they don’t have ideas. (v)
And this faith or conviction can produce real effects, showing
itself in the conduct and tone of their lives, freeing them from
the fears of superstition, and giving them a true liking for
the world, with a noble indifference about any after-life.
And can’t Christians with equal reason be allowed to
believe in the divinity of our Saviour, or believe that in him
God and man make one Person, and be genuinely convinced
of this so that this faith or belief becomes a real principle of
life and conduct? Because of this belief that they have, they
submit to his government, believe his doctrine, and behave
according to his precepts, even though •they don’t form any
abstract idea of the union between the divine and human
nature, and even though •they can’t clear up the notion of
Person in a way that will satisfy a minute philosopher. It
seems obvious to me that we wouldn’t so often be faced
with a demand for a clear and distinct idea of Person in
relation to the Trinity, and wouldn’t so often find difficulties
about this being treated as objections to our faith, if these
demands and objections were made only by people who
had delicately examined and could themselves explain the
principle of individuation in man, or could untie the knots
and answer the objections that can be raised even about
human personal identity!
[Alciphron says that he doesn’t think ‘there is any great
mystery in personal identity’; and expresses agreement with
Locke’s theory about this. That is an opening for Euphranor
to argue against Locke’s thesis that (as Euphranor puts it)
‘personal identity consists in consciousness’. The argument
is not worth much, as it is based on a stunningly, absurdly
uncharitable reading of Locke. [It was launched by Reid, Essays
on the Intellectual Powers of Man, Essay 3, chapter 6.] Anyway, this
interchange contributes nothing to the rest of the dialogue,
which Euphranor puts back on track thus:]
9. Euphranor: There is, I think, a practical kind of faith
or assent that shows itself in the will and actions of a man,
even if his understanding isn’t furnished with corresponding
abstract, precise, distinct ideas. . . . You indeed have conceded
that there are many instances of such practical faith
in other matters that don’t involve religion. So why shouldn’t
it be that doctrines relating to heavenly mysteries might also
be taught, in this saving sense, to common minds that you
may well think incapable of all teaching and faith of the sort
you have been demanding?
‘This mistaken view of teaching and faith’, said Crito, ‘has
led to a great deal of profane and misapplied sarcasm. But all
that can fairly bounced back onto the minute philosophers
themselves, who •muddle scholasticism with Christianity,
and •impute to other men the perplexities, chimeras, and
inconsistent ideas that are often the work of their own brains,
and •argue on the basis of their own wrong way of thinking.
Anyone can see that such an ideal abstracted faith is never
thought of by the great majority of Christians—farmers, for
120
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
example, and artisans and servants. And there’s nothing
in the Bible to suggest that either Jews or Christians are
required to engage in the delicately precise forming of abstract
ideas. Nothing like this is to be found in the law
or the prophets, the evangelists or the apostles Everyone
whose understanding is not perverted by ‘science’ falsely so
called can see that the saving faith of Christians is of quite
another kind, a vital operative principle [roughly = ‘source of
energy or activity’; see (b) in Euphranor’s speech on pages 36–37] that
generates charity and obedience.
Alciphron: Then what can we make of the disputes and
decisions of the famous Council of Nicaea ·which drew up
the so-called ‘Nicene Creed’·, and all the Councils since that
one? What was the intention of those venerable Fathers,
the Homoousians and the Homoiousians? Why did they
disturb themselves and the world with hard words and subtle
controversies? [Those are Greek words meaning, respectively, ‘the
same’ and ‘similar’. The controversy was between two views about the
relationship of the Son to the Father.]
Crito: Whatever their intention was, it couldn’t have been to
do something that is obviously impossible—namely create
precise abstracted ideas of mysteries in the minds of common
Christians! There’s no evidence that the majority of Christians
in those days thought they were obliged to set aside
words, shut their eyes, and form abstract ideas; any more
than men now form abstract ideas of force, time, number,
or many other things about which they nevertheless believe,
know, argue, and dispute. It seems to me that whatever
was the source of that controversy, and however it was
conducted. . . ., what it was really about was not a desire
by either side to convey precise positive ideas to the minds
of men by the use of those controversial terms, but rather
something negative—namely a desire to exclude (on one side)
•the view that there are three Gods, and (on the other) •the
view that there is just one God of whom the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost are merely three aspects.
Alciphron: But so many learned and ingenious theologians
have from time to time offered the world new explanations of
mysteries, claiming to have worked to get accurate ideas, and
wanting to recommend their discoveries and speculations to
others as articles of faith. What are we to make of them?
Crito: To all such innovators in religion I would say with
Hieronymus, ‘Why after so many centuries do you claim to
teach us something that hasn’t been taught before? Why
explain things that neither Peter nor Paul thought needed
to be explained?’ The explanation of mysteries in •divinity
is as futile as the pursuit of the philosopher’s stone [see note
on page 10.] in •chemistry or the perpetual motion machine
in •mechanics; but in each of the three cases the absurdity
is to be blamed not on that branch of enquiry but only on
wrong-headed people engaged in it.
10. What Euphranor has been saying seems to be applicable
also to other mysteries of our religion. We may find
it impossible to form an abstracted idea of original sin, for
example, or an idea of how original sin is passed on ·from
Adam to the rest of us·; but the belief in it may produce in
someone’s mind •a salutary sense of his own unworthiness
and of the goodness of his Redeemer; and from that may
follow •good habits, and from them •good actions, which
are the genuine effects of faith. When faith is considered in
its true light it can be seen to be neither inconsistent nor
incomprehensible, as some men want us to think it is, but
•suited even to common capacities,
•placed in the will and affections rather than in the
understanding, and
•producing holy lives rather than subtle theories.
121
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Faith isn’t something you •passively let flow into you; it’s
an •operative conviction of mind which always produces
some suitable action, disposition, or emotion in those who
have it (I could easily prove and illustrate this by countless
instances taken from human affairs). And indeed, while the
Christian religion is considered as an institution fitted to
ordinary minds rather than to the minds of hair-splitting theoreticians,
and while our notions about faith are accordingly
taken from mankind’s ordinary everyday life rather than
from the special systems of faith-improvers, I don’t think it
will be hard to understand the meaning and use of our belief
in mysteries, and to justify them against the most confident
assertions and objections of the minute philosophers, who
can easily be caught in the very traps that they have set for
others. And that spirit of controversy—the mother and nurse
of heresies!—would doubtless be much reduced if men would
grasp that things should be rated not by their colour, shape
or trade-mark so truly as by their •weight. If some litigious
theologians had proportioned their zeal to the •importance
of the opinions they were propounding, that ·would greatly
reduce the zealous intensity of most of what they had to
say, which· would have spared them and us a great deal of
trouble. Someone who takes his notions of faith, opinion,
and assent from common sense and common usage, and
has maturely weighed the nature of signs and of language,
won’t be so ready to quarrel about the wording of a mystery,
or to break the peace of the church so as to retain or reject a
word.
Here’s a plain example that should convince you of the
effective and necessary use of faith without ideas. [The
example concerns a convinced minute philosopher, a coarse
and callous man with ‘large appetites’ and not much money,
who has an opportunity to perform one villainous act that
will make him rich—an act that he knows he can get away
with. What is there to deter him? Certainly not a sense
of ‘the beauty of virtue’! [See Alciphron’s speech on pages ??– ??.]
In fact, the only way to get some moral leverage on this
man is to] produce in him a sincere belief in a future state.
Although it is a mystery, although it is ‘what eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive’ [1 Corinthians 2:9], this belief will restrain him
from carrying out his wicked project. . . . To a reasonable,
reflective, philosophical mind, the points insisted on by your
refined ·beauty-of-virtue· moralists may be as lovely and
excellent as you please; but I venture to say that, given
mankind as it is, very few people would be influenced by
them. So we see the necessary use of faith, as well as its
powerful effects; and none of this involves having ideas.
11. Alciphron: You and Euphranor apparently want to
convince me that the belief in mysteries doesn’t involve
anything as utterly absurd as we are apt to think, and that
a man needn’t renounce his reason to maintain his religion.
But if this is true why is it that men’s faith dwindles in
proportion as their knowledge grows?
Euphranor: I have learned from you, Alciphron, that there is
nothing like getting to the bottom of things, and analysing
them into their basic elements. So I’ll try to do that with
the question of the nature of faith—you’ll have to judge
whether I succeed. The objections that are made to faith
don’t come from •knowledge, but rather from •ignorance
of what knowledge is; and that ignorance might be found
even in people who are regarded as masters of this or that
particular branch of knowledge. Science and faith have
this in common: they both involve an assent of the mind;
and as the nature of scientific assent is most clear and
evident, we should consider it first, in order to cast a light
on the assent involved in faith. To trace things back to their
122
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
origins, the human mind ·needs aids that are not part of
its basic natural equipment. It· is naturally furnished with
the ideas of particular and concrete [as distinct from ‘abstract’]
things; and what it’s designed for is not •merely being aware
of its ideas but •pursuing its own happiness by actively
operating on the basis of them. For the scientific pursuit of
knowledge about the origins of things, therefore, the mind
needs extra help; specifically, it needs certain general rules
or theorems to guide it in this pursuit; and the true, original,
reasonable end of studying the arts and sciences is to acquire
such rules. Because these rules are general, they can’t be
obtained •by the mere consideration of the original ideas,
or particular things, but only •by means of marks or signs;
and these, being ‘general’ in the sense that they are used
for general purposes, become the immediate instruments
and materials of science. So the mind makes its progress
not •by mere contemplation of particular things, even less
•by contemplating abstract general ideas of things, but •by
appropriately choosing and skillfully managing signs. For
example, everyone knows about
force and number in concrete situations, along with
things that accompany them, things that have them,
and signs of them;
and no-one has any understanding of
force and number considered in the abstract and
captured in precise ·abstract· ideas.
So it’s clear that their •abstract nature isn’t a foundation
for science, and that merely considering their ideas in their
•concrete form isn’t the way to advance in the respective
sciences ·of physics and mathematics·; because nothing is
more evident than that •someone who can’t read or write
understands the meanings of numeral words in concrete
situations as well as •the best scientist or mathematician.
12. But here lies the difference: the one who understands
the notation of numbers can use it to express briefly and
clearly all the variety and degrees of number, and to perform
easily and quickly many arithmetical operations by the help
of general rules. It’s obvious how useful these operations
are in human life, and equally obvious that performing them
requires having an appropriate notation. If mankind were
in a very primitive state, with no use of language, they
wouldn’t know any truths of arithmetic. Their first step
towards that science would be the acquisition of names for
numbers so that they could signify numbers as high as
you like by repeating those names in a certain order. The
next step would be to associate those names with visible
marks—permanent ones, ·not like sounds, which don’t last·.
If this system of marking, this notation, was done well, it
would make it easier for us to discover and apply general
rules to assist the mind in reasoning and judging, and
in extending, recording and communicating its knowledge
about numbers. What the mind is immediately concerned
with in these activities are •the signs or numerals, through
which it is directed to act in relation to •things, or ‘number
in concrete’ (as the logicians call it), without ever considering
the simple, abstract, intellectual, general •idea of number. . . .
I don’t think it is hard to be convinced that the science of
arithmetic is entirely concerned—in its rise, operations, rules
and theorems—with the conventional use of signs, ·which
are of two sorts·, •names ·that are words· and •numerals.
These names and numerals are, in their roles as signs,
universal. The names are related to things, the characters
are related to the names, and both names and characters
are related to operations. There aren’t many ·basic· names
·of numbers·, the stock of them being enlarged by a certain
analogy. So a system of characters will be useful to the
extent that it •is simple and •aptly expresses this analogy.
123
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Thus, words written at length were less useful than the old
Roman numerals, which in turn were less useful than the
modern notation. ·For example, ‘two hundred and forty-four’
was less useful than ‘CCXLIV’, which was less useful than
‘244’·. And the invention of algebraical symbols was a further
advance, for extensive and general use. So there we have
it: arithmetic and algebra are sciences of great clearness,
certainty and extent, whose immediate topic is signs, on the
skillful use and management of which they entirely depend.
Perhaps a little attention to them may help us to understand
the progress of the mind in other sciences, which •differ in
nature, design and purpose but may nevertheless •agree in
the general methods of proof and inquiry.
13. In my view, all sciences that are universal and
demonstrable by human reason will be found to have signs
as their immediate object, though in applying a science we
connect these signs with things. It isn’t hard to grasp why
this is so. . . . Nothing is more natural for us than to use
the things we do know as stepping stones towards things we
don’t know; and to explain and represent less familiar things
by others that are more familiar. Now, it is certain that
(a) before we •reflect we •imagine, and
(b) before we imagine we •perceive by our senses, and
that
(c) of all our senses •eyesight is the most clear, distinct,
various, agreeable and comprehensive.
So it’s natural for us
(a) to help the intellect by imagination,
(b) to help imagination by sense, and
(c) to help the other senses by sight.
Hence figures, metaphors and symbols. We illustrate mental
things by physical ones; we substitute sounds for thoughts,
and written letters for sounds; we use emblems, symbols and
hieroglyphics for things that are too obscure to strike our
minds and too various or too fleeting to be retained. We substitute
imaginable things for intelligible ones, sensible things
for imaginable ones, smaller things for ones that are too big
to comprehend easily, and larger things for ones that are
too small to be clearly picked out, present things for absent
ones, permanent things for perishing ones, and visible things
for invisible ones. Hence the use of models and diagrams.
Thus, •lines are substituted for •time, •velocity, and other
things of very different natures. Thus again, we speak of
minds in a figurative way, describing their operations by
terms borrowed from perceptible things, such as ‘apprehend’,
‘conceive’, ‘reflect’, ‘discourse’ and the like. [‘Apprehend’ comes
from Latin meaning ‘seize’, ‘conceive’ from ‘take together’, ‘reflect’ from
‘bend back’, discourse’ from ‘run to and fro’.] [Euphranor talks a
little about allegories, e.g Plato’s representing the mind by the
driver of a winged chariot which etc., etc. Then:] I’m inclined
to think that the doctrine of signs matters a great deal over
a very wide area, and that if it were properly considered it
would cast a lot of light on things, and provide a genuine
solution for many difficulties.
14. So we can say this much about all signs: (1) They
don’t always suggest ideas signified to the mind. (2) When
they do suggest ideas, they aren’t general abstract ideas. (3)
They have other uses,. . . .such as raising proper emotions,
producing certain dispositions or habits of mind, and directing
our actions in pursuit of the happiness that is the
ultimate end and design, the primary spring and motive, that
sets rational agents at work. (4) The real purpose of speech,
whether it is being used in reasoning, or in expressing
theoretical knowledge or faith or some degree of belief, is not
primarily •to give or get ideas, but rather to guide •actions
aimed at bringing about some conceived good. Sometimes,
indeed, words can lead to suitable actions not merely without
communicating any ideas but without such ideas’ being even
124
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
possible. An example is the algebraic sign standing for the
square root of a negative number: this is useful in logical
operations, although it is impossible to have an idea of any
such quantity as √
-1. And what is true of algebraic signs is
also true of words or language. In fact, modern algebra
is a language—a compact, appropriate, artificial sort of
language—and any algebraic calculation could be expressed
by ordinary words, much less conveniently but with nothing
left out. Also, there’s no avoiding the fact that even the
mathematical sciences themselves—supposed to the most
clear and certain sciences that we have—often fall short of
the clear and distinct ideas that today’s minute philosophers,
whether knowingly or ignorantly, insist on in the mysteries
of religion. (I’m talking here about mathematics considered
as theory, not about practical applied mathematics.)
15. In absolutely any science or field of activity, men
will be sure to embarrass themselves with difficulties and
disputes if they
•move from particulars to generalities, from concrete
things to abstractions, or
•relinquish practical views and the useful purposes of
knowledge, in favour of barren theorising, regarding
means and instruments as ultimate ends, and struggling
to get the precise ideas that they suppose to be
associated with all words.
I’m talking about difficulties and disputes such as the
ones that have sprung up in geometry about •the nature
of the angle of contact ·between a circle and its tangent·,
•proportions, •indivisibles, •infinitesimals and •various other
matters, despite all of which geometry itself is rightly admired
as an excellent and useful science. It really does prove useful
in many real-life situations where it governs and directs the
actions of men, enabling them to do in a sound and accurate
way things that would otherwise be faulty and uncertain.
And by parity of reasoning we shouldn’t regard any other
doctrines that govern, influence or direct the mind of man
to be less true or excellent because they provide material
for controversy and useless theorizing by trouble-makers.
This applies especially to the articles of our Christian faith,
with regard to which belief leads to persuasion which in turn
influences the lives and actions of men.
As for •the perplexity of contradictions and abstracted
notions that crop up in secular sciences and divine faith,
nit-pickers may use •it as an objection, incautious people
may stray into •it, while judicious people keep away from •it.
The belief of Christians can be justified without departing
from the accepted rules of reasoning. And if any pious
men think otherwise, that’s probably a result not of religion
or of reason but merely of human weakness. If there are
especially many unbelievers in our time, I shan’t conclude
that our time knows more than former ages—only that it is
more arrogantly self-confident, and I don’t think that this
confidence is a result of much thought. It seems to me that
the more thoroughly and extensively any man investigates
and thinks about the principles, aims, and methods that
occur in ·secular· arts and sciences, the more convinced he
will be that there’s no weight in the plausible objections that
are brought against the mysteries of faith. And he won’t have
much difficulty maintaining and justifying his position, using
accepted methods of argument and the common principles
of logic, appealing to countless parallel cases all through
the many branches of human knowledge, in all of which the
supposition of abstract ideas creates the same difficulties.
Alciphron: According to this doctrine, anything can be maintained.
There’ll be nothing absurd in Popery, not even
in transubstantiation [the doctrine that in the sacrament of the
Eucharist the bread and wine become the body and blood of Jesus].
125
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Euphranor: Pardon me. What I have been saying doesn’t
justify any article of faith that •isn’t contained in Scripture,
•is in conflict with human reason, •implies a contradiction,
or •leads to idolatry or wickedness of any kind. Those ·four
disqualifiers· are very different from •not being representable
by distinct or abstract ideas!
16. Alciphron: I’ll allow, Euphranor, that your reasoning
has all the force you meant it to have. I freely admit that
•there may be mysteries, that •we can believe things that we
don’t understand, and that •faith can be useful even when
what it’s about is not distinctly grasped. In short, I agree
that there can be faith and mysteries in other things—but
not in religion! The plain reason for this is that it’s absurd to
suppose there to be any such thing as religion; and if there’s
no religion then there can’t be religious faith or mysteries.
Religion obviously implies
•the worship of a God, which worship presupposes
•rewards and punishments, which presuppose
•merits and demerits, good and evil actions, and these
presuppose
•human freedom;
and that is impossible, which means that religion, which
is built on it, must be unreasonable and absurd. It can’t
be reasonable to have fears where there is no guilt, and
there can’t be guilt when everything that happens follows
unavoidably from the structure of the world and the laws
of motion. ·Here is what happens when a man, as we say,
‘raises his hand’ to shade his eyes from the sun·:
•Physical objects strike on his sense-organs
(·Specifically, light-particles strike his eyes·)
•Those organs (·the eyes·) start a vibration in the
nerves.
•That vibration is passed along to the soul or animal
spirits in the brain or root of the nerves [see note on
page 53], starting up in them the kind of motion called
‘volition’.
•The volition starts up a new movement in the ·animal·
spirits.
•This causes the spirits to flow into certain nerves.
•The events in those nerves cause bodily movements
that constitute the action in question (·in our case,
cause his hand to go up over his eyes·).
And all of this happens necessarily, by the laws of mechanism.
So the events that we ordinarily take to be ‘human
actions’ should be regarded as mechanical, and it’s just
wrong to think they have a source that is free. So there
is no basis for praise or blame, fear or hope, reward or
punishment; and religion, as I have already pointed out, is
built on and presupposes those things.
Euphranor: If I have understood you rightly, Alciphron, you
regard man as a sort of organ that is played on by external
objects, which produce different motions and effects in the
organ, depending on the different shapes and textures of the
nerves,
Alciphron: The comparison with an •organ is not bad, but
the best comparison is with a •puppet. Certain particles
coming in straight lines from all perceptible objects compose
so many rays or filaments that push, pull and activate every
part of the soul and body of man, just as threads or wires
operate on the joints of the little wooden machine ordinarily
called a ‘puppet’. The only difference is that the puppet’s
wires are thick and visible to ordinary eyes, whereas the
former—·the rays or filaments that enter into the causation
of human so-called ‘actions’·—are too fine and subtle to be
spotted by any but an able free-thinker. This splendidly
accounts for all the operations that we have been taught to
ascribe to a source of thought within us.
126
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Euphranor: That’s an ingenious line of thought, and must
contribute greatly to freeing men from all anxiety about moral
notions by tracing their actions not to a source in the human
soul but rather to external things. But I have some worries
about it. You suppose the mind to be in a literal sense
‘moved’, and you take its volitions to be mere motions. But
suppose someone said (and, let’s face it, someone may!) that
the soul is not a body, that motion is one thing and volition
another, I’d like to know how you would go about convincing
such a person. Your account will be very clear to those who
accept that the soul is a body and that all its acts are merely
motions. Given that basis, our account of human nature is
true, fine, and new. But if someone denies your supposition
·that the soul is corporeal·—a denial that it’s very easy to
make—then everything you have built on it collapses. If we
grant that the soul is a body and volitions are motions, we are
certainly committed then to a fatal necessity [i.e. to the view that
all our actions are necessary in the sense that whatever we do we were
fated to do, bound to do, inevitably going to do.] But I see no reason
for granting those two points. On the contrary, it seems
clear that •motion and •thought are two things, as really
and as obviously distinct from one another as a •triangle is
from a •sound. So it looks as though your argument for the
necessity of human actions has a premise that needs to be
proved just as badly as the conclusion does.
17. Alciphron: Well, if we suppose that the mind is not
corporeal, I can still prove my conclusion. I shan’t baffle
you with far-fetched arguments, and merely ask you to look
into yourself and observe what happens when some object
comes before your mind. (1) Your understanding considers
it. Then (2) your judgment makes some decree about it, as
a thing to be chosen or rejected, to be done or not done,
and if done then done thus and not so. (3) This decree of
the judgment necessarily determines the will, whose role is
merely to carry out anything ordained by another faculty.
Something •necessary can’t be •free; so there’s no such thing
as ‘freedom of the will’. Freedom is present only when there
is an indifference to either side of the question [i.e. when the
deliberating mind is evenly poised between the alternatives], a power
to act or not act, without being •told what to do or in any
way •controlled ·by something external to the will·; and it’s
obvious that the will can’t be free when it doesn’t have this
indifference and this power. And it’s equally obvious that
the will is not indifferent in its actions, being absolutely
determined and governed by the ·faculty of· judgment. My
point is not affected by the question of what it is that moves
the judgment—whether it’s the greatest present uneasiness
[as Locke came to think], or the greatest apparent good [as many
have thought, including Locke to begin with], or something else
again. Whatever it is that moves the judgment, the fact
remains that the will is always settled and controlled by the
judgment, and so is always subject to necessity. Nowhere
in the entire human make-up is there anything like a free
agent: every faculty is determined in all its acts by something
external to it. The understanding, for instance, can’t alter
one of its ideas—it •necessarily sees each idea in the way
that it presents itself. The appetites are carried towards their
respective objects by a natural •necessity. Reason can’t infer
anything from anything just as it chooses; it is limited by
the nature and connection of things and the eternal rules of
reasoning, ·which means that it is subject to •necessity·. And
the same is true for all our other faculties, as well as for the
will itself, as I have already shown. And if we can believe the
divine Characterizer of our times, the will must be agreed to
be the most slavish of all our faculties. [The Earl of Shaftesbury,
author of Characteristics of. . . etc., was widely liked and admired; but
even Alciphron wouldn’t call him ‘divine’. In making him do so, Berkeley
is throwing in a sarcastic jibe of his own. Some admirers of the present
127
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
work regret its intemperate hostility to Shaftesbury.] ‘Appetite’, says
that noble writer, ‘which is reason’s older and stronger
brother, is sure in every contest to be on the winning side.
As for the will (so highly boasted of), it is never better than a
football ·for those youngsters to kick· or a spinning-top ·for
them to whip to keep it moving·. The youngsters turn out
to be very ill-matched; and eventually the younger of them,
instead of now and then getting in a kick or a lash to little
purpose, leaves the ball or top and starts to kick or lash his
older brother.’
[Crito comments sarcastically on the ‘style and manner’
of this ‘beautiful parable’, and asks why the weaker brother
would get satisfaction from attacking the stronger one. Alciphron
brushes this off, and then:]
Alciphron: The same conclusion can also proved from God’s
foreknowledge:
•Whatever is certainly foreknown will certainly happen.
•What will certainly happen is necessary.
•Necessary actions can’t be the effect of free-will.
So now you have this fundamental thesis in our free-thinking
philosophy demonstrated ·in two· different ways.
Euphranor: [See Q&A note on page 17.] (i) The proposition that
God creates something that is free is not self-contradictory.
(ii) So it is possible that there may be such a thing as a
free creature. (iii) This is something that you can conceive
and suppose. (iv) Such a free creature would think that
he acted. (v) And he would condemn himself for some
actions, and approve of himself for others. (vi) He would
think that he deserved reward or punishment. (vii) And all
these characteristics are actually found in man.
Tell me now, what other qualities does your supposed
free agent have—ones that are not to be found in man? If
there aren’t any, we must conclude that man has all the
marks of a free agent.
Alciphron: Let me see! I was certainly mistaken when I
conceded that it was possible, at least for almighty power,
to make such a thing as a free agent. I wonder how I came
to make such an absurd concession, after what had been
demonstrated in so many different ways.
Euphranor: Certainly whatever •doesn’t imply a contradiction
•is possible for an infinite Power; and whatever •is possible
•can be supposed; therefore, if rational agent •isn’t
self-contradictory then a rational agent •can be supposed.
Perhaps from this supposition I might infer that man is
free. But I won’t suppose him to be a free agent, since you
apparently claim to have demonstrated that he isn’t. But
listen, Alciphron: it’s common knowledge that men base
their opinions about others on themselves, but when you
reach a conclusion about me on the basis of what you know
about yourself, you may be mistaken. Many things that are
clear to someone with your strength of intellect are not so
clear to me, who am often puzzled rather than enlightened
by those very proofs that you regard as clear and evident.
I can’t be thoroughly convinced by any inference, however
logically sound it is, if its premises aren’t clear. So please let
me put questions to you; your answers may sort out for me
the things that at present I am confused about.
Alciphron: I’ll leave with you what I have already said, for
you to consider and chew over. It’s time now for Lysicles
and me to set out ·for London·, so there’s no time for a •long
question-and-answer session.
18. Euphranor: Then let me make a couple of •brief
remarks on what you have said.
(1) You take that for granted something that I cannot
grant, when you say that whatever is certain is necessary.
To me, •certain and •necessary seem to be very different,
128
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
because there’s nothing in certain that implies constraint,
and so there’s nothing in it that isn’t consistent with a
man’s being accountable for his actions. If it is foreseen
that such-and-such an action will be done, can’t it also be
foreseen that it will be done as an effect of human choice
and liberty?
(2) You delicately abstract and distinguish the actions of
the mind, judgment and will; you use such terms as ‘power’,
‘faculty’, ‘act’, ‘determination’, ‘indifference’, ‘freedom’, ‘necessity’
and so on as if they stood for distinct abstract
ideas; and this supposition seems to ensnare the mind into
the same perplexities and errors that have been seen to
accompany the doctrine of abstraction in every other context.
It’s self-evident that there is such a thing as motion; and yet
some philosophers have tried by refined reasoning to prove
there is no such thing. Walking before them was thought
the proper way to confute those ingenious men. [Diogenes is
reported to have said, à propos of Zeno’s difficulty about how there could
be motion, ‘I solve it by walking’.] It is equally obvious that man
is a free agent; and though by abstracted reasonings you
might puzzle me and seem to prove that he isn’t, so long as
I am conscious of my own actions this inward evidentness
of a plain fact will bear me up against all your reasonings,
however subtle and refined they may be. Opposing plain
propositions by obscure ones may convince me that your
philosophers are clever, but it won’t convince me that their
opinions are true. I can’t conceive why the acute Cratylus
[Shaftesbury]—·in his football metaphor [page 128]·—should
allow a power of acting to the •appetite and to •reason [the
brothers] but not to the •will [the football]. If we allow that the
mind does contain these three distinct beings, I don’t see
how this could be true of them. But I don’t find it necessary
to abstract and distinguish as many beings in the soul of
man as you do, which reconciles me to the fact that I can’t do
so! Without any such distinction, it is evident to me—taking
myself as a whole, not as minutely dissected—that I am a free
agent. I’m not helped to go further by being told that the will
is (a) governed by the judgment, or that it is (b) determined
by the object; because
(a) in no ordinary everyday case can I separate the decree
of my judgment from the command of my will;
(b) I know that the sensible object is absolutely inert ·and
so can’t determine anything·; and lastly,
•I am conscious that I am an active being who can and
do determine myself.
I don’t know what theoretical results I might get if were to
•suppose spiritual ·or mental· things to be corporeal, or to
•refine actual and real things into general abstracted notions,
or •by metaphysical skill to split simple and individual things
into many parts. But if ·instead of any of that· I take things
as they are, and ask any plain untutored man whether he
acts or is free in this or that particular action, he immediately
says Yes, and I immediately believe him on the basis of
what I find within myself. And thus, by an induction from
•particular cases I can draw the •general conclusion that
man is a free agent, even if I can’t define or conceive an
abstract notion of freedom in general. If a man is free he
is clearly accountable. And if you •define and abstract and
suppose, and •infer from your definitions, abstractions and
suppositions that there can’t be any freedom in man, and
then •infer from this that he isn’t accountable, I shall take
the liberty of departing from your metaphysical abstracted
sense and appealing to the common sense of mankind.
19. If we consider the notions people have of guilt and
merit, praise and blame, accountable and unaccountable,
we’ll find the question of whether to applaud or censure
someone, acquit or condemn him, always rests on the
question:
129
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Did he perform the action in question?
Or, what comes to the same thing:
Was he himself when he performed it?
So it seems that in our ordinary everyday thought and talk a
person is regarded as •accountable if he is •an agent. You
tell me that man is inactive, and that perceptible objects act
on him, but my own experience assures me of the contrary. I
know I act, and I am accountable for what I do in acting. And
if this is true then the foundation of religion and morality
remains unshaken. The only question ·in this area· that
religion is concerned with is whether the man is accountable;
and according to my sense and the world’s common sense he
is accountable if he acts; and it’s self-evident that he does act.
So the grounds and purposes of religion are secured, whether
or not your philosophic notion of liberty fits man’s actions,
and whether or not his actions are certain or contingent.
Does he deserve the guilt or merit of the action? In asking
that we aren’t asking
•Did he do it with a free will? or
•What determined his will ·when he did it·? or
•Was it certain or foreknown that he would do it?
The only question is: Did he do it wilfully?
Alciphron: But still the question keeps coming back: Is man
free?
Euphranor: To answer this, oughtn’t we first to settle what is
meant by the word ‘free’?
Alciphron: We ought.
Euphranor: In my opinion, a man is said to be ‘free’ insofar
as he can do what he wills to do. Isn’t that right?
Alciphron: It seems so.
Euphranor: So a man who acts according to his will is to be
accounted ‘free’.
Alciphron: I admit that this is right in the vulgar [see note on
page 7] sense of ‘free’. But a philosopher goes higher than
that, and asks whether a man is free to will.
Euphranor: That is, whether he can will as he wills? I don’t
know how ‘philosophical’ it may be to ask this question,
but ·to me· it seems very idle. The notions of guilt and
merit, justice and reward, are in men’s minds in advance
of any metaphysical lectures or chapters; and according to
those accepted natural notions there is no doubt that man
is accountable, that he acts, that he is self-determined.
20. But a minute philosopher, misled by wrong ·initial·
suppositions, runs together things that are obviously distinct:
body—spirit
motion—volition
certainty—necessity.
And an abstracter or refiner analyses the simplest instantaneous
act of the mind to the point where ·he thinks· he can
find within it various faculties and tendencies, principles and
operations, causes and effects. [Note the symmetry: identifying
things that are really distinct, and distinguishing things that are really
identical.] And after he has abstracted, supposed and reasoned
concerning gratuitous and obscure principles, he will
conclude that the act in question isn’t an act at all, and that
man is not an agent but a puppet or an organ played on by
external objects, and his will is a top or a football. And this
passes for philosophy and free-thinking! Whatever it passes
for, it doesn’t at all seem like a natural or sound way of
thinking. It seems to me that if we start from things that are
particular and concrete, and proceed from them to general
notions and conclusions, we’ll have no trouble in this area.
But if we start with generalities, and lay our foundations in
abstract ideas, we’ll find ourselves entangled and lost in a
130
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
labyrinth of our own making. I needn’t point out—because
anyone can see it—how ridiculous it is to (1) ·claim to·
prove that man is not an agent while also (2) pleading for
free thought and action, thus posing as advocates of (1)
necessity and of (2) liberty. I have hastily thrown together
these hints or remarks about ‘this fundamental thesis in
our free-thinking philosophy’, as you call it, and about your
method of arguing for it, which seems to provide a fine
specimen of the sophistry of abstract ideas. If my brevity
has led me to be inappropriately dogmatic, you must excuse
me—you started it by declining to join me in a leisurely
examination of the truth.
Alciphron: I think we have examined matters sufficiently.
Crito: To everything you have said against human liberty,
it is a sufficient answer to point out that your arguments
are wrong from the outset—either because they suppose the
soul to be corporeal or because they rely on abstract ideas.
Supposing the soul to be solid is no better than supposing it
to be red or blue. Supposing the will to consist in motion is
no better than supposing the will to be. . . you name it! These
premises ·about the soul and the will· are (to put it mildly)
neither proved nor probable, and I see no obstacle to rejecting
everything you infer from them. And your arguments also
contain other gross mistakes and baseless principles. •In
any human action you distinguish the last decree of the
judgment from the act of the will. You confuse certainty with
necessity. •You ask, in effect, the absurd question ‘Can a
man will as he wills?’ The proposition A man wills as he wills
is an identical one, ·i.e. a necessarily true logical triviality·.
That is obviously the case, which means that obviously there
must be something wrong with the line of thought that led
you to make a question of it. •You say that the appetites
have by natural necessity a tendency towards their respective
objects; I agree, and I add my agreement that appetites are
not free. But you go further, telling us (1) the understanding
can’t alter an idea that it has, (2) nor can it infer indifferently
anything from anything ·just as it chooses·. What of it?
(1) If we can’t alter the nature of objects, does that mean
that we can’t act at all? [The two versions of (1) reflect Berkeley’s
view—defended in other works, but mainly not in play in this one—that
the objects that we perceive and talk about are ideas.] (2) And if we
aren’t at liberty to make absurd inferences, does it follow
that we aren’t free in any way? •You take it for granted that
the mind is inactive but that its ideas act on it; as if the
contrary weren’t evident to everyone who has the common
sense to know that when the mind considers its ideas it
chooses, rejects, examines, deliberates, decrees—i.e. it acts
on them and they don’t act on it.
Summing up: Because your premises are obscure and
false, the basic point that you claim to have demonstrated
in so many different ways isn’t shown to be true or even
meaningful. And, on the other hand, we don’t have to
do much research to be convinced •that man acts, and
•that man is accountable for his actions. Nothing is clearer
or more obvious than those two propositions; nothing is
more universally accepted by men of all sorts, learned
and unlearned, at all times and in all places. Whatever
may be claimed by abstracters, refiners, and men who are
committed to a false hypothesis, I think it is obvious to every
thinking man of common sense that human minds are so
far from being machines or footballs, acted on and kicked
around by corporeal objects, with no inner source of freedom
or of action, that the only basic true notions we have of
freedom, agent and action are ones we get by reflecting on
ourselves and the operations of our own minds. The minute
philosophers allow themselves to be taken in by the invalid
inferences of three or four eminent bishops of unbelief in
131
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
recent times. I can’t think of anything that matches their
unique credulity, i.e. any other bigoted superstition whose
ringleaders have been able, so openly and widely, to draw
their followers from the plain dictates of nature and common
sense.
21. Alciphron: The discoverers of truth have always
met up with the objection that they are departing from
accepted opinions. The ·sneering· label ‘unique’ is a tax
on free-thinking, and as such we most willingly accept it and
glory in it. A genuine philosopher is never ‘modest’ in such a
way as to prefer authority to reason, or an old and common
opinion to a true one. Such false modesty discourages men
from treading in untrodden paths and from shining new
light; and that makes it a greater enemy to free-thinking
than any other personal quality.
Crito: A judicious person who will follow evidence wherever
it leads will also allow authority to have its due weight on
disputable points. Without preferring authority, we can
accept it as a good back-up to reason. So your gentlemen
of the minute philosophy can save yourself the trouble of
announcing all those commonplaces about reason, and
discoveries, and light. We aren’t attached to authority against
reason, or afraid of untrodden paths that lead to truth,
and we are ready to follow a new light once we are sure
it isn’t a will-o’-the-wisp. Reason may oblige a man to believe
something that he doesn’t like; but why should a man give up
salutary notions in favour of others that are as unreasonable
as they are harmful? Your schemes, principles and boasted
demonstrations have been proposed and examined at length.
You have shifted your notions, successively retreated from
one scheme to another, and in the end renounced them
all. Your objections ·to Christianity· have been treated in
the same manner, and with the same outcome. If ·from
the things you have held against Christianity· we set aside
•everything that comes from the errors and faults of particular
persons, and •difficulties which, from the nature of
things, we aren’t obliged to explain, it is surprising to see
how little remains—after such magnificent threats!—that can
amount to a relevant objection against the Christian religion.
What you have produced has been tried by the fair test of
reason; and even if you hope to get the upper hand through
ridicule when you can’t get it through reason, I predict that
in the upshot you’ll find that you can’t destroy all sense of
religion.
how Berkeley starts the next sentence: Make your countrymen
ever so vicious, ignorant, and profane,
either he meant: However vicious, ignorant, and profane you
claim your countrymen to be,
or he meant: However vicious, ignorant, and profane you
cause your countrymen to be,
men will still be disposed to look up to a supreme Being.
Religion, right or wrong, will survive in some shape or other,
and there will surely be some worship either of God or
the creature [that is Berkeley’s phrase—meaning?]. As for your
ridicule: well, your sect presents us with the spectacle of
•the most unintelligible men of the age parading themselves
as free-thinkers,
•men so strong in assertion yet so weak in argument,
•advocates for freedom introducing necessity,
•patriots trampling on the laws of their country,
•claimants to virtue destroying the motives for virtue.
Can anything be more ridiculous than that? Let any impartial
man cast an eye on the opinions of the minute philosophers,
and then say if anything can be more ridiculous than
to believe such things and at the same time laugh at the
‘credulity’ ·of others·.
132
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
22. Lysicles: Say what you will, we have the laughers
on our side; and as for your ‘reasoning’, I take that to be
another name for sophistry.
Crito: And I suppose by the same rule you take your own
sophisms to be arguments! Let me be frank about this:
I don’t know of any type of sophism—·any type of logical
mistake·—that minute philosophers don’t use against religion.
They are guilty of •working from false assumptions, in
taking it for granted that we believe contradictions; of •bad
causal thinking, in asserting that uncharitable feuds and
discords are the effects of Christianity; and of •point-missing
in demanding that we demonstrate things that we only claim
to believe as matters of faith. [Crito gives each of these a technical
Latin label.]. . . .
Euphranor: Speaking for myself, if sophistry is the art or
power of deceiving other men, I must acquit these gentlemen
of it. They seem to have led me on a journey through atheism,
libertinism, fanaticism and fatalism not •to convince me of
the truth of any of them so much as •to confirm me in
my own way of thinking. They have displayed their flimsy
wares not to cheat but to amuse us. Knowing them to
be self-announced masters of ridicule, I don’t know what,
seriously, to make of them.
Alciphron: You don’t know what to make of us! I’d be sorry
if you did. Only a superficial philosopher can be quickly
fathomed.
23. Crito: Creating ambiguity about where one stands
seems to be the sure way to fame and esteem in the learned
world as it now is. When an able reader can’t decide whether
his author is atheist or deist or polytheist, Stoic or Epicurean,
sceptic or dogmatist, unbeliever or religious fanatic, joking
or serious, he immediately concludes that the author is
enigmatic and deep. In fact it’s true of the most admired
writers of our time that no-one can tell what to make of them,
or what they are getting at.
Alciphron: We have among us moles that dig deep under
ground, and eagles that soar out of sight. We can act all
parts and become all opinions, putting them on or off with
great freedom of wit and humour.
Euphranor: It seems then that you are a pair of inscrutable,
unfathomable, fashionable philosophers.
Lysicles: That can’t be denied.
Euphranor: But I remember that you started off with an
open dogmatic air, talked of plain principles and evident
reasoning, and promised to make things as clear as noonday,
to wipe out wrong notions and plant right ones in their place.
Before long, ·though·, you began to back away from your first
notions and adopt others; you advanced one while retracting
another, asserted and conceded, said and unsaid. And after
having followed you through so many untrodden paths and
intricate mazes, I find myself no nearer ·to understanding
what you actually think·.
Alciphron: Didn’t we tell you that the gentlemen of our sect
are very good at teasing?
Euphranor: But it seems to me to be useless for a plain man
with some settled beliefs or principles to do battle with such
slippery, dodging, changeable philosophers. The rule seems
to be: the ·Christian· man must stand still in one place
while his ·free-thinking· adversary chooses and changes his
fighting-position, has full range and liberty to move around
the battle-field, and attack his ·Christian· opponent on all
sides, in all shapes, from close up or (with missiles) from far
away, on horseback or on foot, in light or heavy armour..
Alciphron: There’s no denying that a gentleman has a great
advantage over a strait-laced pedant or bigot.
133
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
Euphranor: But, at the end of it all, how am I better off from
the conversation of two such knowledgeable gentlemen? I
hoped to unlearn my errors, and to learn truths from you,
but I find to my great disappointment that I haven’t been
untaught anything, or taught anything.
Alciphron: It’s hard to unteach men their prejudices, but
that has to be done before we can offer to teach them the
truth. And, anyway, we don’t now have time to prove and
argue.
Euphranor: [The ensuing remarks about laws of hospitality, confinement
in the castle etc. are a running joke. It looks like a rather thin
cover for the anger and contempt that have been building up, especially
on the Christian side.] Well, suppose that my mind is white
paper and that you are invited to write on it the things that
you would teach me if only I were teachable. Don’t try to wipe
out my present opinions, or to prove your own. For once,
don’t joke or tease. Just let me know some one conclusion
of yours before we part. If you don’t, I’ll beg Crito to violate
the laws of hospitality towards those who have violated the
laws of philosophy by hanging out false lights to someone
who is—·according to you·—benighted in ignorance and error.
[False lights were lights placed on the sea-shore in a position that is likely
to draw a ship onto the rocks.] I appeal to you, Crito: shouldn’t
these philosophical knight-errants be confined in this castle
of yours until they make reparation?
‘Euphranor is right,’ said Crito, ‘and my sentence is that
you remain here in prison until you have done something
towards satisfying my undertaking to Euphranor, which was
that he would know your opinions from yourselves, which
you also agreed to.’
24. Alciphron: Since it must be so, I will now reveal what
I take to be the sum and substance, the grand arcanum [see
note on page 10] and final conclusion of our sect. I can do it in
two words [and he utters a two-Greek-word sentence which
means There are only hypotheses.]
Crito: So you’re a downright sceptic. But, sceptic as you are,
you admit that it is
•probable that there is a God,
•certain that the Christian religion is useful,
•possible that it is true,
•certain that if it is true, the minute philosophers are
in bad shape.
Given all this, how can there be any question about what
course a wise man should take? Whether the principles of
Christians or unbelievers are •truest may be made a question;
but there is no question about which are •safest. If you
have doubts about all opinions you must have doubts about
your own, which means that for all you know Christianity
may be true. The more doubt, the more room there is for
faith, because a sceptic has less right than anyone else to
demand evidence [= ‘evidentness’]. But whatever uncertainty
there may be about some things, this much is certain:
•either there is a God or there isn’t,
•either there is a revelation or there isn’t,
•either man is an agent or he isn’t,
•either the soul is immortal or it isn’t.
If the negatives are not sure, the affirmatives are possible. If
the negatives are improbable, the affirmatives are probable.
The more any of your able men finds himself unable to prove
any one of these negatives, the stronger grounds he has to
suspect he may be mistaken. So a minute philosopher who
wants to act consistently ought to share with the sceptic
not merely the sceptic’s doubts but also his diffidence,
his modesty, and his timidity. He shouldn’t announce an
ocean of light and then lead us to an abyss of darkness. If
that conduct isn’t ridiculous, I don’t know what ‘ridiculous’
means! As for your ridiculing something that may for all you
134
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
know be true—I can’t make any sense of that. It isn’t acting
as a wise man with regard to your own interests, or as a
good man with regard to the interests of your country.
25. Cicero says somewhere: ‘Let us either •get rid of
religion altogether or •retain it altogether.’ If there is a single
instance of a people prospering without any religion, propose
in the British Parliament that we change our constitution
and live without religion. If there is any religion better than
Christianity, propose ·to the Parliament· that we introduce
that new religion. A sceptic is a member of a community,
just like any other man, and he can distinguish good from
evil, whether natural or political; and his knowledge of this
distinction should be his guide as a patriot, even though
he isn’t a Christian. And if he doesn’t claim to know
even this much, he should stop claiming to correct or alter
something that he knows nothing about. Also, someone who
merely doubts shouldn’t behave as if he could demonstrate.
Consider someone who says:
I find my country in possession of certain tenets,
·namely those of Christianity·; they appear to do good,
which is why they are encouraged by the legislature;
they are a main part of our constitution; and I don’t
find that these ·free-thinking· innovators can disprove
them, or substitute things more useful and certain in
their place; so I shall go along with those tenets, out
of regard for the good of mankind and for the laws of
my country.
I don’t say that this man is a Christian, but I regard him as a
patriot. With something that matters as much as Christianity
does, •not to inquire is folly, but it is even greater folly •to
condemn without inquiring.
Lysicles seemed heartily tired of this conversation. ‘It is
now late,’ he said to Alciphron, ‘and everything is ready for
our departure. Everyone has his own way of thinking, and
I can no more adopt another man’s way of thinking than
I can adopt his complexion and facial features.’ Alciphron
pleaded that they had complied with Euphranor’s conditions
·for being released from the castle·, and that they should
now be set free; and Euphranor answered that he had no
further claims to make—all he had wanted was to know their
tenets.
·EPILOGUE·
26. After the philosophers had left, I remarked to Crito that it
was hard to understand how men who are so easy to •confute
should be so difficult to •convince.
‘Aristotle explains this’, said Crito. ‘He says that arguments
don’t have an effect on everyone, but only on those
whose minds are prepared by upbringing and habits, as land
is prepared for seed (Nichomachean Ethics 10:9). However
clear a point is, the odds are that it won’t be understood
by someone whose habits and cast of mind go against
it. So weak a thing is •reason when in competition with
•inclination!’
I replied that this answer might hold with respect to some
people at some times, but that it didn’t seem satisfactory
when applied to inquiring men at a time when reason is so
much cultivated and thinking so much in vogue.
‘A man who is a keen social observer’, said Crito, ‘has
said that these days thinking is talked of more than it was in
ancient times, but practised less! And that since the revival
of learning, men have read much and written much but
thought little, so that for us thinking closely and soundly is
a tiny part of what a learned man does, and doesn’t figure
at all in the activities of the socially polished man. The
free-thinkers, it must be admitted, parade themselves as
thinkers but don’t show much exactness in their thinking. A
135
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
lively man, and what the world calls “a man of sense”, are
often no good at all at thinking. The ability to think is not
a mere gift of nature, but must be improved and perfected
by much attention and exercise on very different subjects;
which means that it requires more time and trouble than
today’s quick-off-the-mark men care to take.—Those are the
views of a judicious friend of mine. If you aren’t already
sufficiently convinced of their truth, you need only look at
the dark, confused, admired writers of this famous sect;
then you’ll be able to judge whether those who are led by
men whose heads are so wrong can have very good heads of
their own! Take for example Spinoza, the great leader of our
modern unbelievers, whose writings contain many schemes
and notions that have been much admired and followed in
recent years. For example: •undermining religion under the
pretence of vindicating and explaining it; •maintaining that
it isn’t necessary to believe in Christ according to the flesh;
persuading men that •miracles are to be understood only in
a spiritual and allegorical sense, •that vice is not as bad a
thing as we are apt to think, •that men are mere machines
impelled by fatal necessity.’
I remarked: ‘I have heard Spinoza described as a man of
close argument and demonstration.’
‘He did indeed demonstrate,’ replied Crito, ‘but by his
standards anyone could demonstrate anything! If a man
is allowed the privilege of making his own definitions of
common words, it will be easy for him to ‘demonstrate’ conclusions
that are true in one sense and false in another—true
(and indeed manifest truisms) in his sense but false (and
indeed seeming paradoxes) when the words are taken in their
ordinary senses. For example, let Spinoza define ‘natural
right’ to be natural power and he will easily demonstrate that
whatever a man can do he has a right to do. The folly of this
procedure is utterly obvious, but our free-thinkers who claim
to have the lumen siccum are so passionately prejudiced
against religion that they’ll accept as demonstrations the
grossest nonsense and sophistry of weak and wicked writers.
[Lumen siccum is Latin for ‘dry light’. It comes from Bacon’s brilliant
metaphor: ‘The human intellect doesn’t burn with a dry light, because
what the person wants and feels gets pumped into it.’]
27. ‘And these men make so much noise with their
thinking, reasoning and demonstrating that they prejudice
some well-meaning people against all use and improvement
of reason. One man saw a neighbour of his ruined by the
vices of a free-thinking son, and acquired such a prejudice
against thinking that he wouldn’t let his own son read Euclid,
because he had been told that it might teach him to think. He
was rescued from this by a friend, who convinced him that
the epidemic was not an outbreak of thinking, but merely
an unthinking pretence of thinking. I know one eminent
free-thinker who never goes to bed without a gallon of wine
in his belly, and he always replenishes it before the fumes
have left his brain, so that he hasn’t had one sober thought in
the past seven years.’ [He adds two more anecdotes reporting
disgraceful behaviour by free-thinkers. Then:] ‘It is strange’,
said Crito, ‘that such men should parade themselves as
free-thinkers! But it’s even stranger that other men should
be on bad terms with thinking and reasoning because of
such pretenders.’
I answered that some good men thought there is an
opposition between reason and religion, knowledge and faith,
nature and grace, and were led by that to conclude that the
way to promote religion is to quench the light of nature and
to discourage all rational inquiry.
28. ‘I shan’t comment on the intentions of these men,’
replied Crito, ‘but surely their notions are very wrong. What
could dishonour religion more than representing it as an
136
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
unreasonable, unnatural, ignorant institution? God is the
Father of all lights, natural as well as revealed. •Natural
greed is one thing, and •the natural light is another; and you
can’t argue that because one is bad so is the other. Similarly,
you can’t argue that because false ‘knowledge’ is bad that
real knowledge is bad also. So whatever is said about one
of them in the Bible is not to be interpreted as having said
something about the other.’
I insisted that human learning in the hands of theologians
had, from time to time, created great disputes and divisions
in the church.
‘Just as abstracted metaphysics have always tended to
produce disputes among Christians as well as other men,’
said Crito, ‘it should seem that genuine truth and knowledge
would calm this mood that makes men sacrifice the undisputed
duties of peace and charity to disputable notions.’
‘After all,’ I said, ‘whatever may be said for reason, the
sceptics and unbelievers of today won’t be cured by it.’
‘I won’t dispute that’, said Crito. ‘To cure an illness you
should consider what produced it. If men had reasoned
themselves into a wrong opinion, one might hope to reason
them out of it. But that’s not how things stand. The unbelief
of minute philosophers seems to arise from things very
different from thought and reason. People are often turned
into unbelievers by little incidents, vanity, disgust, mood,
inclination, without any help from reason. Faced with a
doctrine whose general tendency one finds disagreeable, the
mind is prepared to enjoy and improve everything that can
possibly be thought to count against it. Thus, someone’s
‘reason’ for his unbelief may be the coarse manners of some
country curate, the polished manners of a ·great family’s·
chaplain, the wit of a minute philosopher, a joke, a song, a
tale. . . . Vice, laziness, quarrelsomeness and fashion produce
minute philosophers, and quite a lot of people become minute
philosophers through sheer bad temper. Who can expect
such an irrational and capricious thing should yield to
reason? Still, it may be worthwhile to argue against such
men and expose their fallacies, if not for their sake then
for the sake of others who might otherwise be swayed by
them. . . .
9. ‘The most general pretext that looks like a reason is
the one that points to the variety of opinions about religion.
This is a rock for a lazy and superficial mind to •sit on and
take a rest. But a more spirited mind with a sounder way of
thinking will •stand on it and look around, examining and
comparing the differing institutions of religion. He will want
to know, of all these,
•Which is the most sublime and rational in its doctrines,
the most venerable in its mysteries, most
useful in its commands, most decent in its worship?
•Which creates the noblest hopes, and most worthy
views?
He will consider their rise and progress and try to discover:
•Which owes least to human arts or arms?
•Which flatters the senses and gross inclinations of
men?
•Which adorns and improves the most excellent part
of our nature?
•Which has been propagated in the most wonderful
manner?
•Which has overcome the greatest difficulties, or
showed the most disinterested [= ‘not self -interested’] zeal
and sincerity in its adherents?
He will inquire into
•Which squares best with nature and history?
He will consider
•Which savours of the world, and which looks like
wisdom from above?
137
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
He’ll be careful to separate human alloy from anything that
is divine; and over-all he will form his judgment like a
reasonable free-thinker. But instead of taking such a rational
course, one of those hasty sceptics will conclude straight off
that there’s no wisdom in politics, no honesty in business, no
knowledge in philosophy, no truth in religion; and all by the
same sort of inference from premises about the numerous
examples of folly, knavery, ignorance and error that are to be
met with in the world. And because people who know nothing
about anything think they are sharp-sighted in religion, this
learned sophism is oftenest levelled against Christianity.
30. ‘In my opinion, if you want to convince an unbeliever
who can be brought to reason, you should start by
clearly convincing him of the existence of a God; because
it seems to me that a real theist can’t be an enemy to the
Christian religion, and that what basically makes someone
a minute philosopher is his ignorance or disbelief about
God’s existence. Those who are acquainted with the great
authors in the minute philosophy presumably don’t need
to be told this. That God exists can be clearly proved, and
is a proper object of human reason; whereas the mysteries
of his nature—and indeed any other mysteries there are in
religion—can’t possibly be explained and proved by reason.
It is sufficient if we •show that there’s nothing absurd or selfcontradictory
in our beliefs on those matters, and (instead
of forming hypotheses to explain them) •use our reason only
for answering the objections brought against them. But we
ought always to distinguish •the serious, modest, honest
man of sense who has doubts about religion, and behaves
like a prudent man in doubt, from •the minute philosophers,
those profane and conceited men, who insist on trying to
convert others to their own doubts. When someone of this
kind presents himself, we should consider what species he
belongs to:
•first-hand philosopher?
•second-hand philosopher?
•libertine?
•scorner?
•sceptic?
Each type requires its own special treatment. Some men
are too ignorant to be humble, and without humility nothing
can be learned. But though a man can’t be convinced of
anything unless he has done some thinking and considering,
even the most ignorant ·and thoughtless· can ·sometimes·
be laughed out of their opinions. I once saw a bright woman
get the better of two minute philosophers. . . .by taking her
cue from their predominant claims about themselves. •To
the one who claimed to be the most incredulous man upon
earth, she remarked that for someone who was credulous
enough to trust the most valuable things—his life and his
fortune—to his pharmacist and his lawyer, it was absurd
to claim to be too incredulous to trust his soul (a mere
trifle, according to him) to his parish-priest! •To the other,
a nattily dressed dandy who said that he favoured the most
unbounded freedom, she remarked that he was an absolute
slave in matters of dress (to him the most important thing
in the world), while he was earnestly contending for freedom
of thinking (which was something he never bothered to
do). . . . There are very few first-hand minute philosophers,
not enough of them to matter in themselves. But their
followers, who pin their faith on them, are numerous and
are as confident as they are credulous; ·and they do matter·,
because there’s something in the air and manner of these
second-hand philosophers that is very apt to disconcert a
serious man who believes in argument—it’s much harder to
put up with than the weight of their objections!’
31. Euphranor suggested that it would be greatly to
the public’s benefit if, instead of discouraging free-thinking,
138
Alciphron George Berkeley Seventh dialogue
there was erected a Dianoetic Academy [= ‘think-tank’] or
seminary for free-thinkers, provided with quiet rooms, and
galleries, and shady walks and groves, where after seven
years of silence and meditation a man might become a
genuine free-thinker, and from then on be legally entitled to
think what he pleased, and have a badge to distinguish him
from counterfeits!
‘Really seriously,’ said Crito, ‘I think that what the present
time needs most is more thinking, and that the real cause
of whatever is wrong can fairly be attributed to the general
neglect of education in those who need it most, namely the
people of fashion. What can be expected when those who
have the most influence have the least sense, and those who
are sure to be followed set the worst example? When the
young are so uneducated and yet are heard from so much?
When modesty is regarded as feebleness, and a deference
to years, knowledge, religion and laws is regarded as a lack
of sense and spirit? [He evidently means that modesty etc. are
regarded etc. by the young, because he goes on: ] Such precocious
development wouldn’t have been valued or encouraged by
the wise men of antiquity, whose views on this matter are so
out of line with the spirit of our times that modern ears, I’m
afraid, couldn’t bear them. What I’m going to say would seem
ridiculous to our British youth, who are so full of ideas and
so boldly in favour of trying out new things and setting their
country to rights, but I think it will be accepted by men of
sense. It is this: if today’s governments would try, as an experiment,
to consider themselves in that old Homeric light as
pastors of the people whose duty it was to improve their flock,
they would soon find that this requires a very different kind
of upbringing from the modern one, and different maxims
from those of the minute philosophy. If our youth were really
accustomed to thought and reflection and an acquaintance
with the excellent writers of antiquity, we’d see the licentious
frame of mind commonly called ‘free-thinking’ banished from
the presence of gentlemen, along with ignorance and bad
taste. ·And one reform in how the young are brought up
needs special attention·. As things are, men follow vice for
the sake of pleasure, and fly from virtue because they hate
pain. So what is needed is for young minds to be formed
and accustomed to receive pleasure and pain from proper
objects, i.e. to have their inclinations and aversions pointed
in the right directions. . . . Anyone who feels the cursed
effects of a wrong upbringing—in his mind, his health, or his
fortune—should ponder this thought: There is no better way
for you to make amends for what is wrong in yourself than
preventing it from being wrong also in your descendants.
While Crito was saying this other guests came in, which
put an end to our conversation.
139